 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1001
H.P. 739 House of  Representatives, March 10, 2021
An Act  To Ensure Parents'  Access to Their Minor and Adult 
Children with Special Needs
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LEMELIN of Chelsea.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representatives: CONNOR of Lewiston,  GRIFFIN  of Levant.

Page 1 - 130LR1433(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the separation of parents and guardians from their children and from the 
4 persons with special needs for whom they are responsible who are admitted into a hospital 
5 or care facility can cause irreparable damage both psychologically and physically to the 
6 parties; and
7Whereas, in any state of emergency the need for access of family members and 
8 responsible parties to their children and persons with special needs is acute; and
9Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
10 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
11 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
12 therefore,
13Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
14Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง20-A is enacted to read:
15ยง20-A.  Right of access to children and persons with special needs
16 Notwithstanding the provisions of this Title and Title 37-B, chapter 13 to the contrary, 
17 a parent or guardian whose child or person with special needs for whom the parent or 
18 guardian is responsible is admitted into a hospital or any care facility under this Title is 
19 allowed access to the child or person with special needs unless the parent's or guardian's 
20 access has been limited by a court of law.  If a parent or guardian is unable to exercise 
21 access to the child or person with special needs, the parent or guardian may assign another 
22 person access to the child or person with special needs in the parent's or guardian's absence.
23Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
24 takes effect when approved.
25SUMMARY
26 This bill directs that, even during a state of emergency, parents and guardians of 
27 children and persons with special needs who are admitted into a hospital or care facility be 
28 allowed access to the child or person with special needs unless the parent's or guardian's 
29 access has been limited by a court.  If a parent or guardian is unable to exercise access to 
30 the child or person with special needs, the parent or guardian may assign another person 
31 access to the child or person with special needs in the parent's or guardian's absence.26
27
28
29
30
31
