 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 706
H.P. 518 House of  Representatives, March 4, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Lower the Voting  Age to 16 Years of  Age
Received by the Clerk of the House on March 2, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2  and ordered printed  pursuant to  Joint 
Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'NEIL  of Saco.
Cosponsored by Senator DAUGHTRY  of Cumberland and
Representatives: MORALES of South Portland, TALBOT ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 130LR0843(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Qualifications of electors; written ballot; military servicemen; 
6students.  Every citizen of the United States of the age of 18 16 years and upwards, 
7 excepting persons under guardianship for reasons of mental illness, having his or her 
8 residence established in this State, shall be an elector for Governor, Senators and 
9 Representatives, in the city, town or plantation where his or her residence has been 
10 established, if he or she continues to reside in this State; and the elections shall be by written 
11 ballot.  But persons in the military, naval or marine service of the United States, or this 
12 State, shall not be considered as having obtained such established residence by being 
13 stationed in any garrison, barrack or military place, in any city, town or plantation; nor shall 
14 the residence of a student at any seminary of learning entitle the student to the right of 
15 suffrage in the city, town or plantation where such seminary is established.  No person, 
16 however, shall be deemed to have lost residence by reason of the person's absence from the 
17 state in the military service of the United States, or of this State.
18Indians.  Every Indian, residing on tribal reservations and otherwise qualified, shall 
19 be an elector in all county, state and national elections.
20Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
21Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
22 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
23 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
24 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
25 resolution by voting upon the following question:
26 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to reduce the voting 
27 age qualification by 2 years, from 18 years of age or older to 16 years of 
28 age or older?"
29 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
30 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
31 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
32 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
33 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
34 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
35 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
36 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
37Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
38 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
39 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
Page 2 - 130LR0843(01)1SUMMARY
2 This constitutional resolution proposes to reduce the voting age qualification by 2 
3 years, from 18 years of age or older to 16 years of age or older, subject to approval at 
4 referendum.2
3
4
