 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 155
H.P. 111 House of  Representatives, January 21, 2021
Resolve, Directing the Board of Pesticides  Control  To Prohibit the 
Use of Certain  Neonicotinoids for  Outdoor Residential Use
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 19, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  pursuant to Joint  Rule 308.2 and ordered printed  
pursuant to Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GROHOSKI of Ellsworth.
Cosponsored by Senator MAXMIN of  Lincoln and
Representatives: DODGE  of Belfast, MILLETT of Cape Elizabeth, O'NEIL of Saco, 
PEBWORTH of Blue Hill, PLUECKER of Warren,  ZEIGLER of Montville.

Page 1 - 130LR0838(01)1Sec. 1.  Prohibit the use of certain neonicotinoids for outdoor use.  
2Resolved: That, pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 7, section 610, the 
3 Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control shall 
4 prohibit the use of any product containing the active ingredient dinotefuran, clothianidin, 
5 imidacloprid or thiamethoxam used for application in outdoor residential landscapes such 
6 as on lawn, turf or ornamental vegetation.  Products used for preserving wood, controlling 
7 or treating indoor insects and treating pets, as defined under Title 7, section 712, subsection 
8 16, are specifically exempt from the prohibition under this section.  Rules adopted pursuant 
9 to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
10SUMMARY
11 This resolve directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Board 
12 of Pesticides Control to prohibit the use of any product containing certain neonicotinoids 
13 used for application in outdoor residential landscapes such as on lawn, turf or ornamental 
14 vegetation.  The resolve also provides that products used for preserving wood, controlling 
15 or treating indoor insects and treating pets are specifically exempt from the prohibition.
