 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST  SPECIAL  SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1438
H.P. 1054 House of  Representatives,  April 12, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Declare the  Natural, Inherent and Unalienable  Right of 
Enjoying Personal  Privacy
Received by the Clerk of the House on April  8, 2021.  Referred to  the Committee  on 
Judiciary pursuant to  Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed pursuant to  Joint  Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FECTEAU of Augusta.

Page 1 - 130LR1959(01)1Constitutional amendment.  Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Natural rights.  All people are born equally free and independent, and 
6 have certain natural, inherent and unalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying 
7 and defending life and liberty, of acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and of 
8 pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness, and of enjoying personal privacy.
9Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
10Resolved: That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
11 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
12 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
13 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
14 resolution by voting upon the following question:
15 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to declare that all 
16 people have the natural, inherent and unalienable right of enjoying 
17 personal privacy?"
18 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
19 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
20 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
21 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
22 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
23 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
24 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
25 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
26Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
27 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
28 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
29SUMMARY
30 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine by declaring that all 
31 people have the natural, inherent and unalienable right of enjoying personal privacy.30
31
