 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 886
H.P. 642 House of  Representatives, March 8, 2021
Resolve, To  Encourage  Employment in the Direct  Care Workforce
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAY of Raymond.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  ARFORD  of Brunswick, BAILEY of Gorham, CUDDY of 
Winterport, GRIFFIN of Levant, HASENFUS of Readfield, STOVER  of Boothbay, 
Senator: CURRY of Waldo.

Page 1 - 130LR1623(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the direct care field is undergoing a shortage of workers, and new workers 
4 need to be attracted as soon as possible; and
5Whereas, this legislation directs the Department of Labor to develop and implement 
6 a multimedia public service campaign that promotes direct care worker jobs as a career 
7 choice; and
8Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
9 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
10 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
11 therefore, be it
12Sec. 1.  Public service campaign promoting direct care worker jobs.  
13Resolved:  That the Department of Labor, in coordination with the Department of 
14 Economic and Community Development and the Department of Health and Human 
15 Services, shall develop and implement a multimedia public service campaign that promotes 
16 direct care worker jobs as a career choice.  In developing the campaign materials, the 
17 Department of Labor shall ensure that new residents in the State, racial and ethnic 
18 minorities, men, younger persons including high school students, older persons and persons 
19 with disabilities are represented.  The Department of Labor shall also seek grants and other 
20 funds from public and private sources in developing the campaign.
21Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
22 takes effect when approved.
23SUMMARY
24 This emergency resolve directs the Department of Labor, in coordination with the 
25 Department of Economic and Community Development and the Department of Health and 
26 Human Services, to develop and implement a multimedia public service campaign that 
27 promotes direct care worker jobs as a career choice.
