 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 955
S.P. 307 In Senate,  March  9, 2021
An Act  To Narrowly Tailor Emergency Powers of  the Governor and 
Other Public Officials
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator KEIM of Oxford.
Cosponsored by Representative FECTEAU of Augusta and
Senators: BENNETT  of Oxford, FARRIN of Somerset, GUERIN of Penobscot,  
Representatives: BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro, MORRIS of Turner.

Page 1 - 130LR1077(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  37-B MRSA ยง742, sub-ยง1-A is enacted to read:
31-A.  Limitation on emergency powers.  The exercise of any emergency power a state 
4 or local official may have under the Constitution of Maine or the laws of this State that 
5 binds or regulates the public is limited as provided in this subsection.
6 A.  As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following 
7 terms have the following meanings.
8 (1)  "Constitutional right" means any right guaranteed under the United States 
9 Constitution or the Constitution of Maine including, but not limited to, the right to:
10 (a) Travel, work, assemble and speak;
11 (b) Exercise religion without government interference;
12 (c) Make contracts and hold property without government interference;
13 (d) Be free from unreasonable searches and seizures; and 
14 (e) Purchase and keep firearms and ammunition.
15 (2) "Emergency order" means an order, decree, regulation or other mandate 
16 proclaimed or promulgated by a state or local official.
17 (3)  "State or local official" means the Governor, a person within the executive 
18 branch or an elected or appointed member of a municipal government.
19 B.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, an emergency order that is issued by a 
20 state or local official that binds, curtails or infringes the rights of private parties must 
21 be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling health or safety purpose. Only the Governor 
22 may issue an order that infringes constitutional rights, and that order must be narrowly 
23 tailored to serve a compelling health or safety purpose.  Each emergency order must be 
24 limited in duration, applicability and scope in order to reduce any infringement of the 
25 rights of private parties or constitutional rights.
26 C.  A court of this State has jurisdiction to hear a case challenging the legality of an 
27 emergency order, including compliance with the limitations imposed on emergency 
28 orders pursuant to this subsection.  A court shall expedite consideration of a challenge 
29 brought pursuant to this paragraph to the extent practicable. Inequality in the 
30 applicability of the impact of emergency orders on analogous groups, situations and 
31 circumstances may constitute one ground among others for a court to invalidate or 
32 enjoin an emergency order, or some of its applications, on the basis that it is not 
33 narrowly tailored to serve a compelling public health or safety purpose.
34SUMMARY
35 This bill requires the emergency powers exercised by the Governor, a person within 
36 the executive branch or a municipal official that bind, curtail or infringe the rights of private 
37 parties to be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling health or safety purpose and to be 
38 limited in duration, applicability and scope to reduce any infringement of individual liberty.  
39 Only the Governor may issue an order that infringes a right guaranteed under the United 
40 States Constitution or the Constitution of Maine, including, but not limited to, freedom of 35
36
37
38
39
40
Page 2 - 130LR1077(01)41 travel, assembly, work, speech, religion, contract and purchase and possession of arms and 
42 ammunition, and that order must be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling health or safety 
43 purpose limited in duration, applicability and scope to reduce any infringement of a 
44 constitutional right.
5  This bill also gives a state court jurisdiction to hear a case challenging the legality of 
6 the exercise of emergency powers and requires the court to expedite consideration of the 
7 case to the extent practicable.  Inequality in the applicability of impact of emergency orders 
8 on analogous groups, situations and circumstances may constitute one ground among 
9 others for a court to invalidate or enjoin an emergency order, or some of its applications, 
10 on the basis that it is not narrowly tailored to serve a compelling public health or safety 
11 purpose.1
2
3
4
