 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 56
H.P. 22 House of  Representatives, January 13, 2021
An Act  To Prohibit Insurers and  Third-party Payors from 
Adjusting Their Fee Schedules for In-network Providers Unless the Adjustments Apply to All  Specialties
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 11, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Health Coverage, Insurance  and Financial Services pursuant to Joint  Rule 308.2 and  ordered 
printed pursuant to Joint Rule  401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DOORE of Augusta.

Page 1 - 130LR0488(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4303, sub-ยง24 is enacted to read:
324.  Reimbursement; nondiscrimination.  A carrier may not make any change to a 
4 reimbursement rate or fee schedule applying to any provider who participates in the 
5 carrier's network, as long as the provider is acting within the lawful scope of that provider's 
6 license in the delivery of the covered service or procedure, unless the change in 
7 reimbursement rate or fee schedule is applied in the same manner to all participating 
8 providers for a health care service or procedure covered by the carrier.  A carrier may not 
9 discriminate based on a provider's license or specialty in a manner that denies payment to 
10 a provider for an increase in reimbursement to account for a cost-of-living adjustment.
11SUMMARY
12 This bill prohibits a carrier from making any change in reimbursement rates or fee 
13 schedules applying to any providers participating in the carrier's network unless the 
14 changes are applied in the same manner to all participating providers able to provide a 
15 health care service or procedure within the lawful scope of the providers' individual 
16 licenses.  The bill also prohibits a carrier from discriminating against a provider based on 
17 the provider's license or specialty in a manner that denies payment to the provider for an 
18 increase in reimbursement to account for a cost-of-living adjustment.
