 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 772
H.P. 577 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2021
An Act  To Permit Naloxone  Possession,  Prescription, 
Administration and Distribution  in Public  and Private Schools
Submitted by the Department of  Education pursuant  to Joint  Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MILLETT of Cape Elizabeth.

Page 1 - 130LR0410(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง6307 is enacted to read:
3ยง6307.  Naloxone hydrochloride possession, prescription, administration and 
4distribution
51.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
6 following terms have the following meanings.
7 A.  "Collaborative practice agreement" means a written and signed agreement between 
8 a physician licensed in this State or a school health advisor and a school nurse that 
9 provides for the possession, prescription, administration and distribution of naloxone 
10 hydrochloride by the physician or school health advisor and administration of naloxone 
11 hydrochloride by the school nurse or designated school personnel to students, staff or 
12 visitors during school or a school-sponsored activity or otherwise on school grounds 
13 under emergency circumstances involving an opioid overdose or apparent opioid 
14 overdose.
15 B.  "Designated school personnel" means those employees, agents or volunteers of a 
16 school administrative unit or approved private school designated by a collaborative 
17 practice agreement who have completed the training required by the guidelines 
18 developed pursuant to subsection 8 to administer naloxone hydrochloride to a student, 
19 staff member or visitor.
20 C.  "Naloxone hydrochloride" means medication, in a noninjectable form, administered 
21 to reverse the effects of opioids in the emergency treatment of an opioid overdose.
22 D.  "School" means a public or approved private school.
23 E.  "School health advisor" means a physician or family or pediatric nurse practitioner 
24 appointed to act as a school health advisor pursuant to section 6402-A.
25 F.  "School nurse" means a nurse appointed to serve as a school nurse pursuant to 
26 section 6403-A.
272.  Collaborative practice agreement; adoption authorized.  A school administrative 
28 unit or an approved private school may authorize adoption of a collaborative practice 
29 agreement for the purposes of stocking, possessing and administering naloxone 
30 hydrochloride as provided under this section.  The administration of naloxone 
31 hydrochloride in accordance with this section is not the practice of medicine.
323.  Collaborative practice agreement; authority.  A collaborative practice agreement 
33 permits a physician licensed in this State or school health advisor to prescribe naloxone 
34 hydrochloride and direct a school nurse to administer naloxone hydrochloride in good faith 
35 to any student, staff member or visitor experiencing an apparent opioid overdose during 
36 school or a school-sponsored activity or otherwise on school grounds.  Pursuant to a 
37 collaborative practice agreement, a physician licensed in this State or school health advisor 
38 may authorize the school nurse during school or a school-sponsored activity or otherwise 
39 on school grounds to designate designated school personnel to administer naloxone 
40 hydrochloride if the school nurse is not present when a student, staff member or visitor 
41 experiences a suspected opioid overdose.
424.  Collaborative practice agreement; terms and provisions.  A collaborative 
43 practice agreement must include the following information:
Page 2 - 130LR0410(01)1 A.  Name and address of the school;
2 B.  Identification and signatures of the physician or school health advisor and school 
3 nurse who are parties to the collaborative practice agreement, the dates the agreement 
4 is signed by each party and the beginning and end dates of the period of time within 
5 which the agreement is in effect; and
6 C.  Any other information considered appropriate by the physician or school health 
7 advisor and school nurse.
85.  Use of naloxone hydrochloride without a collaborative practice agreement.  If 
9 a collaborative practice agreement has not been adopted pursuant to subsection 2, the 
10 governing body of a school administrative unit or an approved private school may authorize 
11 a school nurse to:
12 A.  Stock and possess naloxone hydrochloride prescribed by a legally authorized 
13 individual; and
14 B.  Administer naloxone hydrochloride prescribed by a legally authorized individual 
15 to any student, staff member or visitor that the school nurse, based on the school nurse's 
16 professional judgment, suspects to be experiencing an opioid overdose.
17 The administration of naloxone hydrochloride in accordance with this subsection is not the 
18 practice of medicine.
196.  Manufacturer or supplier arrangement.  A school administrative unit or an 
20 approved private school may enter into an arrangement with a manufacturer of naloxone 
21 hydrochloride or a 3rd-party supplier of naloxone hydrochloride to obtain naloxone 
22 hydrochloride at fair market prices, reduced prices or no cost.
237.  Purchase from licensed pharmacies.  A collaborative practice agreement under 
24 this section may provide that a school administrative unit or an approved private school 
25 may purchase naloxone hydrochloride from a pharmacy licensed in this State.
268.  Guidelines.  By January 1, 2022, and as needed after that date, the department in 
27 consultation with the Department of Health and Human Services shall develop and make 
28 available to all schools guidelines for the management of opioid overdose during school or 
29 a school-sponsored activity or otherwise on school grounds.  The guidelines must include, 
30 but are not limited to:
31 A.  Education and training for school personnel on recognition of opioid overdose, 
32 rescue breathing and the administration of naloxone hydrochloride; and
33 B.  Procedures for responding to opioid overdose.
34SUMMARY
35 This bill provides for the administration of naloxone hydrochloride in a noninjectable 
36 form to students, school staff and school visitors through collaborative practice agreements 
37 between physicians licensed in this State or school health advisors and public and private 
38 school nurses.
