 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST  SPECIAL  SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1529
H.P. 1133 House of  Representatives,  April 19, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Create a Right to  Privacy
Received by the Clerk of the House on April  15, 2021.  Referred to  the Committee  on 
Judiciary pursuant to  Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed pursuant to  Joint  Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'NEIL  of Saco.
Cosponsored by Senator BAILEY of York and
Representative: FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor.

Page 1 - 130LR1601(01)1Constitutional amendment.  Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Natural rights.  All people are born equally free and independent, and 
6 have certain natural, inherent and unalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying 
7 and defending life and liberty, of acquiring, possessing and protecting property, of privacy 
8 and of pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness.
9Constitution, Art. I, ยง5 is amended to read:
10Section 5.  Unreasonable searches prohibited.  The people shall be secure in 
11 their persons, houses, papers and, possessions and electronic data and electronic 
12 communications from all unreasonable searches and seizures; and no warrant to search any 
13 place, or seize any person or thing, or access electronic data or electronic communications 
14 shall issue without a special designation of the place to be searched, and the person or thing 
15 to be seized, nor without probable cause -- supported by oath or affirmation.
16Constitution, Art. I, ยง25 is enacted to read:
1725.  Privacy.  All natural persons have an inherent right to privacy that is free from 
18 governmental and private intrusion.  The inherent right to privacy includes but is not limited 
19 to privacy of a natural person's personal life, personal communications, private affairs and 
20 personal thoughts or inner life.
21 A natural person's interaction with an Internet, communication or other electronic data 
22 service does not diminish the natural person's reasonable expectation of privacy.
23Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
24Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
25 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
26 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
27 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
28 resolution by voting upon the following question:
29 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to create a natural and 
30 inherent right to privacy in which a natural person is free from 
31 governmental and private intrusion, including but not limited to privacy of 
32 a natural person's personal life, personal communications, private affairs 
33 and personal thoughts or inner life, and that is not diminished by a person's 
34 interaction with an Internet, communication or other electronic data 
35 service and requires a warrant prior to government access of a person's 
36 electronic data and electronic communications?"
37 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
38 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
39 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
40 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
41 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
42 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
Page 2 - 130LR1601(01)43 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
44 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
3Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
4 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
5 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
6SUMMARY
7 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine by creating a natural and 
8 inherent right to privacy in which a person's personal life and affairs are free from 
9 governmental and private intrusion and not diminished by a person's interaction with an 
10 Internet, communication or other electronic data service and that requires a warrant prior 
11 to government access of a person's electronic data and electronic communications.1
2
7
8
9
10
11
