 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 95
H.P. 61 House of  Representatives, January 13, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Establish a Right to Food
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 11, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  pursuant to Joint  Rule 308.2 and ordered printed  
pursuant to Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: CONNOR of Lewiston,  DUNPHY  of Old Town, FECTEAU of Augusta,  
LANDRY of  Farmington,  LIBBY of Auburn,  PLUECKER of Warren, POIRIER  of 
Skowhegan, SAMPSON of Alfred.

Page 1 - 130LR0217(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง25 is enacted to read:
5Section 25.  Right to food.  All individuals have a natural, inherent and unalienable 
6 right to save and exchange seeds and the right to grow, raise, harvest, produce and consume 
7 the food of their own choosing for their own nourishment, sustenance, bodily health and 
8 well-being, as long as an individual does not commit trespassing, theft, poaching or other 
9 abuses of private property rights, public lands or natural resources in the harvesting, 
10 production or acquisition of food.
11Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
12Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
13 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
14 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
15 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
16 resolution by voting upon the following question:
17 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to declare that all 
18 individuals have a natural, inherent and unalienable right to grow, raise, 
19 harvest, produce and consume the food of their own choosing for their own 
20 nourishment, sustenance, bodily health and well-being?"
21 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
22 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
23 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
24 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
25 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
26 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
27 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
28 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
29Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
30 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
31 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
32SUMMARY
33 This constitutional resolution declares that all individuals have a natural, inherent and 
34 unalienable right to grow, raise, harvest, produce and consume the food of their own 
35 choosing for their own nourishment, sustenance, bodily health and well-being.
