 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
2 Date:la,l~\Z.. \ MAJORITY 
3 LABOR AND HOUSING L.D. 677 
(Filing No. S-2.lS) 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretaty of the Senate. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 SENATE 
7 130TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST SPECIAL SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT" 71"" to S.P. 264, L.D. 677, "An Act To Improve 
10 Public Sector Labor Relations by Amending the Laws Governing Arbitration under Certain 
11 Public Employees Labor Relations Laws" 
12 Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
13 SUMMARY 
14 This amendment incorporates a fiscal note. 
Page 1 -130LR0641(02) 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 06/04/21 feac 
130th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 677 LR 641(02) 
An Act To Improve Public Sector Labor Relations by Amending the Laws Governing Arbitration 
under Certain Public Employees Labor Relations Laws 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment'~"( S-2\15j 
Committee: Labor and Housing 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential cunent biennium cost increase -All Funds 
Potential current biennium cost increase -higher educational institutions 
Potential cunent biennium revenue decrease -higher educational institutions 
Potential current biennium cost increase -local units of government 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
Cunent law regarding labor relations for municipal public employees, the University of Maine System, Maine 
Maritime Academy and the Maine Community College System employees and state employees including judicial 
employees provides that the detennination of an arbitrator regarding salaries, pensions and insurance is advisory only. 
This legislation changes the law to provide that an arbitrator's determination regarding these issues is binding on all 
parties. This may result in increased personnel and other direct and indirect costs to the employers of these public 
employees if, as a result of the arbitrator's decision, salary, pension or insurance costs increase more than they would 
have absent this legislation. The impact cannot be detennined at this time. 
Allowing public employees affected by this legislation to strike if their employer fails to enter into an agreement to 
cany out the binding detenniniations made by the arbitrators may result in the loss of federal financial aid as well as 
tuition and other revenue to the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System and Maine 
Maritime Academy if the higher educational institutions are forced to suspend operations due to the strike and return 
federal funds to the federal student aid program and refund tuition and room and board fees to students. The impact 
will depend on the bargaining units affected by the strike and the ability of the higher educational institutions to find 
replacement workers in order to allow operations to continue. 
Additional costs to the Maine Labor Relations Board can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
