 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 963
H.P. 709 House of  Representatives, March 9, 2021
An Act  To Create Culturally Sensitive Treatment  and Recovery 
Halfway Houses for Immigrants  Transitioning out of the Juvenile 
Justice System
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BROOKS  of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY  of Androscoggin and
Representatives: CLOUTIER of Lewiston, CRAVEN of Lewiston, MELARAGNO of Auburn, MORALES of South  Portland, WARREN of Hallowell, Senators: CLAXTON of  
Androscoggin, MAXMIN of Lincoln.

Page 1 - 130LR1353(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  34-A MRSA ยง1402, sub-ยง10-A is enacted to read:
310-A.  Treatment and recovery halfway houses for immigrants.  The commissioner 
4 shall establish treatment and recovery halfway houses for youth in the State to provide 
5 halfway house services and substance use disorder treatment, mental health treatment, 
6 education and job training and employment and job opportunity services for youth 
7 transitioning out of the juvenile justice system who are immigrants or whose families have 
8 immigrated to the State.  The commissioner shall work in partnership with a nonprofit 
9 organization formed for the purpose of involving immigrants in the civic work of their 
10 communities, along with other local immigrant community members and associations and 
11 local, state and federal agencies to provide halfway house services and other services in a 
12 culturally sensitive manner.  The halfway houses must be assigned to only one gender and 
13 must provide housing services, referrals to community-based services and supports and 
14 education and employment resources. The halfway houses must be funded with 
15 contributions from the department and with any grants, donations and private funding 
16 received for this purpose.
17SUMMARY
18 This bill requires the Commissioner of Corrections to establish treatment and recovery 
19 halfway houses for youth in the State to provide halfway house services and substance use 
20 disorder treatment, mental health treatment, education and job training and employment 
21 and job opportunity services for youth transitioning out of the juvenile justice system who 
22 are immigrants or whose families have immigrated to the State. The commissioner is 
23 directed to work in partnership with a nonprofit organization formed for the purpose of 
24 involving immigrants in the civic work of their communities, local immigrant community 
25 members and associations and local, state and federal agencies to provide halfway house 
26 services and other services in a culturally sensitive manner.  The halfway houses must be 
27 assigned to only one gender and must provide housing services, referrals to community-
28 based services and supports and education and employment resources. The halfway houses 
29 must be funded with contributions from the Department of Corrections and with any grants, 
30 donations and private funding received for this purpose.18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
