 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Opposition to  
LD 1123 , An Act to Create a Presumption That a Cardiovascular Injury or Disease or 
Pulmonary Disease Suffered by Certain Law Enforcement Officers Is in the Course of 
Employment   
 
April 6, 2023  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee.  My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1123 
on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders elected by their peers to serve on the Association’ s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish positions on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal leaders appreciate the services provided by municipal law enforcement 
agencies and recognize the pressures that the provision of public safety se rvices places on these 
men and women and the related toll on their personal health and wellness. To suggest otherwise 
is an absolute fallacy.  Municipal officials know full well that consistent e xposure to negative 
events is associated with elevated suicid e risks, and early onset cardiac disease which often 
occurs earlier in life and outside the cardiac disease screening available to the general 
population.  
While it will be easy for supporters of the initiative to paint the municipal opposition with  
the br oad stroke of a disinterest in the health of their employees , state policies that support 
waiting until a law enforcement officer  suffers an injury before putting into place a presumption 
of injury is of great concern .  Simply delaying access to appropriat e preventive care and shifting 
burdens onto the property taxpayers will not resolve the underlying issue.   
Rather than turning to costly presumptions of workplace disability, injury or death, the 
legislature should collaborate with municipal government pa rtners to fund and implement 
proactive healthcare programs that are uniquely designed to monitor the health of individuals 
who routinely operate within high stress environments.   
To that end, MMA has a solution.  
At the request of its Legislative Policy C ommittee, this session the Association has 
advanced a yet -to-be-printed bill, An Act To Create The Public Safety Health and Wellness Fund 
To Benefit Public Safety Workers and Volunteers .  This legislation establish es a statewide 
reimbursement fund to offset the cost of provid ing public safety employees, including volunteer 
first responders, access to a specially designed  health and wellness program that mitigate s both 

the physical and mental health effects that the re peated exposure to traumatic events has on these  
professionals.  
Specifically, the proposal allows public safety agencies to receive reimbursement for the 
costs of providing informed  mental health, wellness, and specialized cardiac screening  for risk  
facto rs unique to public safety employees.  Additionally, the initiative  directs that the services be 
available to all levels of law enforcement including reserve employees and  allow s the use of 
telehealth services where necessary  and practical . Finally, 5% of  the gross sales and excise tax 
revenue generated by adult use cannabis establishments in Maine is used to  fund this program.  
This approach  presents a tremendous opportunity for the state to collaborate with 
municipal partners to address this issue before  it is too late.  The legislature could fund these 
preventive measures at a fraction of the cost of the presumption proposed in LD 1123 and 
achieve the very thing this bill cannot; that is, improved health for the very public employees  
who deal with indivi duals  at their most vulnerable stages.   
Absent a state level willingness to act proactively, municipal officials ask that the 
legislature appropriate the revenues necessary to reimburse municipalities for 100% of the cost 
associated with implementing this  mandate and establish a statewide pool to guarantee the 
delivery payment for career and life ending events uniformly across the state.  
 Thank you for considering the municipal perspective.  If you have questions about the 
Association’s testimony, please d o not hesitate to contact me at 1 -800-452-8786 or 
kdufour@memun.org . 
