MAINE ASSOCIATION OF POLICE 
President: _ Legal Counsel: 
Kevin Riordan f'*"_; ;_ 
Vice Presidents: ., _.m4___._=i TrP}'bh I'Ie'$Ie_" P-A- 
Chrgs Todd - est ‘, a 
1;: William K. McKinley 
Shane Stephenson Da"IeI R- FeIkeI 
Gino Bianchini 2 “€i""fv 'l" 
.,,.,. PO-f '51.‘- .» J0l'\alI'1al'l
V Steve Borst' 
Secretagg ﬁreasurerz ._\mll__ Ke" 8* Cha ma" 
Jason Burke John W. Chapman 
Executive Director: Post office Box 2263 
Paul Gaspar South Portland, ME 04106 
(207) 767-2558 
“In Valor There Is Hope” 
Testimony of Executive Director Paul Gaspar before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing 
Thursday April 6"‘ , 2023 
LD 1123 "An Act to Create a Presumption That a Cardiovascular Injury or Disease or 
Pulmonary Disease Suffered by Certain Law Enforcement Officers Is in the Course of 
Employment" 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Paul Gaspar and I am a resident of South Portland. 
I speak before you today in both my capacity as the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Police 
(MAP) and our membership of approximately 900 full time, municipal police ofﬁcers and public safety 
dispatchers throughout the state, as well as a founding partner of the Maine Law Enforcement Coalition 
(MLEC). 
The Coalition, along with its partners; the Maine State Law Enforcement and Troopers Associations, as 
well as the Maine Lodge of Fraternal Order of Police, represents over 90% of the full time certified, state, 
municipal and county law enforcement officers throughout the state. 
Today, it’s in this these capacities that I speak in support of LD 1123 "An Act to Create a Presumption That 
a Cardiovascular Injury or Disease or Pulmonary Disease Suffered by Certain Law Enforcement Officers Is 
in the Course of Employment" 
We are grateful to Senator Lawrence for sponsoring this bill as well as its co-sponsors in support ofa 
critical matter affecting all first responders. This bill will provide peace of mind for Maine law 
enforcement ofﬁcers and their families as well as bring parity to our fellow ﬁrst responders in Maine. 
A rebuttable presumption for Maine’s law enforcement officers recognizes a clearly established 
connection between the incredible stress and trauma these men and women experience on a daily basis 
and its effects on their mental, emotional and physical wellbeing. 
Being already recognized by the Maine Legislature in granting the same presumption to Maine 
firefighters, this bill will do the same and codify the protection necessary for the brave and committed 
men and women serving the State of Maine. 
A proven and direct correlation exists between the constant and cumulative demands placed on law 
enforcement ofﬁcers over the course of their 20-25 years of service. Although some see their achievement 
as a windfall of pension and retirement at an earlier age than some other professions, the tradeoffs to this 
are men and women who have one of the highest rates of Post Traumatic Stress Disease (PTSD), 
alcoholism, divorce, and suicide in the United States, and can expect a shorter natural life expectancy than 
the citizens they serve by approximately 2o years. 
Website: www.maineassociationofpolice.com
No one calls the police when things are going well. Law enforcement officers are constantly faced with 
people in crisis, victimization at all age and socio-economic levels. They themselves face the very real 
eventuality that they may be injured, permanently disabled or killed in the line of duty. All this while 
political and ill informed efforts to hold them accountable, ultimately put them in further peril in their 
duties. This phenomenon over the last 4 years has lead to record numbers of resignations, retirements, 
low morale and the inability of agencies across the nation to ﬁll vacant positions. 
In Maine we are not immune. We are facing a statewide shortage of committed people seeking to be the 
next generation of law enforcement officer and in some instances, losing more people than we are able to 
recruit or hire. One has only to open their local paper to understand that this is a trajectory we cannot 
sustain or accept. The people of Maine expect that their safety is never in jeopardy and those that remain 
in our ranks have been beset with long hours, irregular schedules, time taken away from their families, 
and the stress that comes with constantly being scrutinized by narratives having no connection or basis in 
Maine. 
There has been large strides made by previous legislatures in recognizing the palpable toll all our ﬁrst 
responders face; including law enforcement, ﬁre/ EMS services, dispatchers and corrections. There 
already exists a rebuttable presumption for PTSD under Worker’s Compensation however, the fact that it 
still remains on “life support” under a sunset provision, it exists nonetheless. I use the term life support, 
not as hyperbole, but as the very description of what the presumption provides to those in crisis. 
Currently, there are over 28 states in the country that have some form of presumption for hypertension, 
heart and pulmonary diseases. Cardiac death is also recognized by the Federal Public Safety Officers 
Benefits Guidelines enacted into law which provides for a line of duty death benefit if an officer dies ofa 
cardiac event within 48 hours of a precipitating event. I can say that from our membership we have at 
least one officer whose name appears on the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial due to his 
untimely death of a cardiac event after a SWAT training. This federal beneﬁt, and its recognition of this 
type of presumption provided financial stability and some comfort Sgt, Rick Better’s family who gave as 
much to this profession as their father did; up to and including his life. 
This committee has the ability to bring Maine up to date with the country and our federal government in 
supporting LD1123. In a time in this country where many officers who face protracted or permanent 
disability feel as though their families would have been better off if they had actually lost their lives, this 
presumption is timely, necessary and recognizes the sacrifices made in service to the people of Maine. 
On behalf of the MLEC and MAP, I would urge and hope for the committee to vote “Ought To Pass”. 
Thank You for your time and I will be happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
QQﬂ(£..~_. Paul D. Gaspar 
Executive Director 
Maine Association of Police 
Maine Law Enforcement Coalition.
CODE PART: 
Maine Revised Statutes 
Title 39-A: WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
Chapter 7: PROCEDURES 
Maine Legislative Website 
DESCRIPTION: 
Sec. 328. 
Cardiovascular injury or disease and pulmonary disease suffered by a firefighter or resulting ina 
firefighter ’s death 
Cardiovascular injury or disease and pulmonary disease suffered by a firefighter or resulting ina 
firefighter ’s death are governed by this section. 
1.Firefighter defined. For the purposes of this section, “firefighter ” means an active member ofa 
municipal ﬁre department or of a volunteer firefighters association if that person is a member ofa 
municipal fire department or volunteer firefighters association and if that person aids in the 
extinguishment of fires, regardless of whether or not that person has administrative duties or other 
duties as a member of the municipal fire department or volunteer firefighters association. 
2.Presumption. There is a rebuttable presumption that a firefighter received the injury or contracted 
the disease arising out of and in the course of employment, that sufficient notice of the injury or 
disease has been given and that the injury or disease was not occasioned by the willful intention of the 
firefighter to cause self~injury or injury to another if the firefighter has been an active member ofa 
municipal fire department or a volunteer firefighters association, as defined in Title 30-A, section 3151, 
for at least 2 years prior to a cardiovascular injury or the onset of a cardiovascular disease or 
pulmonary disease and if: 
1.The disease has developed or the injury has occurred within 6 months of having participated in 
firefighting, or training or drill that actually involves fire fighting; or 
2.The firefighter had developed the disease or had suffered the injury that resulted in death within 
6 months of having participated in fire fighting, or training or drill that actually involved fire fighting. 
What is the Heart Bill? - Massachusetts 
The Heart Law presumption, commonly called the "Heart Bill" presumes that a police officer's heart 
ailment is work-related for purposes of accidental disability retirement, unless there is sufficient evidence 
to rebut it. ln other words, if you have a heart ailment (e.g., you have a heart attack), you are entitled to 
accidental disability retirement benefits unless the entity opposing the presumption can provide 
“competent evidence" proving that it was n_oi‘ work related. Even if there is absolutely no evidence that 
the impairment is work-related, the presumption stands. Attempts to overcome the presumption by 
pointing out numerous risk factors such as high cholesterol, obesity, or smoking arte typically 
unsuccessful because the mere existence of risk factors does not in and of itself rebut the presumption. 
The impact of the risk factors must include substantial evidence of how the risk factors affected the 
individual. 
Even in the event that a heart ailment could not be said to have arisen in the line of duty, Massachusetts 
law provides that if a pre-existing condition is accelerated as a result of a hazard on the job, causation for 
the injury is established, even if the pre-existing condition is not work-related. For example, court cases 
have ruled that a police officer’s hypertension was exacerbated by normal police duties and thus work- 
related and that a fire fighter’s degenerative disc disease was exacerbated by working on a firetruck and 
thus work-related. 
Furthermore, if you have a collective bargaining agreement that applies the Heart Law presumption to 
“injured-on-duty" leave, you may be entitled to 111F leave if you have a heart ailment and decide to go 
back to work. For example, if you have a heart attack and take 4 weeks to recover, you may be entitled 
to receive 111F pay for that time period instead of being forced to use your sick days. You should contact 
your union representative if you believe this may affect you.
LABOR CODE SECTION 3212.5, PRESUMPTIONS FOR HEART AND PNEUMONIA — State 
of California 
ln the case of a member of a police department of a city or municipality, or a member of the State 
Highway Patrol, when any such member is employed upon a regular, full-time salary, and in the case ofa 
sheriff or deputy sheriff, or an inspector or investigator in a district attorney's office of any county, 
employed upon a regular, full-time salary, the term “injury” as used in this division includes heart trouble 
and pneumonia which develops or manifests itself during a period while such member, sheriff, or deputy 
sheriff, inspector or investigator is in the sen/ice of the police department, the State Highway Patrol, the 
sheriff's office or the district attorney's office, as the case may be. The compensation which is awarded for 
such heart trouble or pneumonia shall include full hospital, surgical, medical treatment, disability 
indemnity, and death benefits as provided by the provisions of this division. Such heart trouble or 
pneumonia so developing or manifesting itself shall be presumed to arise out of and in the course of the 
employment; provided, however, that the member of the police department, State Highway Patrol, the 
sheriff or deputy sheriff, or an inspector or investigator in a district attorney's office of any county shall 
have served five years or more in such capacity before the presumption shall arise as to the 
compensability of heart trouble so developing or manifesting itself. This presumption is disputable and 
may be controverted by other evidence, but unless so controverted, the appeals board is bound to find in 
accordance with it. This presumption shall be extended to a member following termination of service fora 
period of three calendar months for each full year of the requisite service, but not to exceed 60 months in 
any circumstance, commencing with the last date actually worked in the specified capacity 
Such heart trouble or pneumonia so developing or manifesting itself in such cases shall in no case be 
attributed to any disease existing prior to such development or manifestation. 
The term "members" as used herein shall be limited to those employees of police departments, the 
California Highway Patrol and sheriffs ’ departments and inspectors and investigators of a district 
attorney's office who are defined as peace officers in Section 830.1, 830.2, or 830.3 of the Penal Code. 
34 USC Subtitle I, CHAPTER 101, SUBCHAPTER XI: PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS ’ DEATH 
BENEFITS From Title 34—CRlME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT Subtitle l— 
Comprehensive Acts CHAPTER 101—JUSTICE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT SUBCHAPTER 
XI—PUBLlC SAFETY OFFICERS ’ DEATH BENEFITS 
(k) Death by heart attack, stroke, or vascular rupture; presumption As determined by the Bureau, a heart 
attack, stroke, or vascular rupture suffered by a public safety officer shallbe presumed to constitute a 
personal injury within the meaning of subsection (a), sustained in the line of duty by the officer and 
directly and proximately resulting in death, if— (1) the public safety officer, while on duty— (A) engages in 
a situation involving nonroutine stressful or strenuous physical law enforcement, fire suppression, rescue, 
hazardous material response, emergency medical services, prison security, disaster relief, or other 
emergency response activity; or (B) participates in a training exercise involving nonroutine stressful or 
strenuous physical activity; (2) the heart attack, stroke, or vascular rupture commences — (A) while the 
officer is engaged or participating as described in paragraph (1); (B) while the officer remains on that duty 
after being engaged or participating as described in paragraph (1 ); or (C) not later than 24 hours after the 
officer is engaged or participating as described in paragraph (1); and (3) the heart attack, stroke, or 
vascular rupture directly and proximately results in the death of the public safety officer, unless competent 
medical evidence establishes that the heart attack, stroke, or vascular rupture was unrelated to the 
engagement or participation or was directly and proximately caused by something other than the mere 
presence of cardiovascular-disease risk factors. 
References to Links informing remarks; 
1.) Blood pressure in ﬁrefiqhters._police officers. and other emergency responders - Publtlfed (nih.qov) 
2.) 0528083 Presumpttonfoi ﬂutyRelatedfliness-Presentation pre|im.pdf lwa.qov) 
3.) chubb-workers-comp-occupational-disease-state-trackinq-chart.pdf 
4.) Presumptive Benefits in Workers’ Compensation E American Academy of Actuaries (actuary.orq_) 
5.) fnsiqhts-Research-Brief-Presumptive-Coveraqepdf(ncci.com) 
6.) Generaf Law - Part f, Title lV, Chapter 32, Section 94 (malegislatureoov) 
7.) https:Iiwww.of ﬁcer.comIcommand;hq: ‘supulies-serviceslhealthcarelarticleI20998653Iheart-ciisease~ 
and-law-enforcement 
8.) 34 USC Subtitle l, CHAPTER 101. SUBCHAPTER Xi: PUBUC SAFETY OFFICERS ‘ DEATH BENEHTS 
(housegov)
