‘ A 2 
CENTRAL MAINE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs 
LD 1223, An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and Insurance in the Joint Use of Public Utility 
Equipment 
May 10, 2023 
Testifying: Ought not to Pass 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony in opposition to LD 
1223 —An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and insurance in the Joint Use of Public Utility Equipment. 
This seeks to give municipalities seeking to attach municipal broadband, telecommunications lines, 
and other facilities to utility poles a competitive advantage over all other entities attaching to 
utility poles by capping the insurance requirements for municipalities and shifting the risk of loss 
associated with their facilities to Cl\/I P's ratepaying customers and other attaching entities. 
Recently, the Town of Somerville filed a Rapid Response Complaint with the Public Utilities 
Commission seeking to force Central i\/Iaine Power and other pole owners to accept the same 
insurance provisions proposed by LD 1223. The Commission rejected the Town's Complaint, 
concluding that the Town's proposal violated both statute (35-A iVl.R.S. § 711) and regulation 
(l\/laine Public Utilities Commission Rule Chapter 880, § 2) requiring utility pole owners to provide 
non-discriminatory access to all entities seeking to attach their facilities to utility polesl . Just like 
the Commission, this committee should also conclude that the insurance provisions proposed by 
LD 1223 would give municipalities an unfair advantage over other competitors in the marketplace. 
As an owner of utility poles, and consistent with the requirement of non~discriminatory access, 
Cl\/l P, like other pole owners, uses a standard pole attachment agreement with all entities 
attaching facilities to Cl\/iP's poles, which requires, among other things, that all entities attaching 
facilities to the utility poles obtain and carry at least $5,000,000 in general liability insurance to 
cover the significant risks of personal injury, death, and property damage associated with 
attaching facilities to utility poles. Those risks include, but are not limited to, the risks associated 
with installing facilities in close proximity to electric lines and the risk that facilities could fail and 
fall to the ground. 
Rather than agree to procure the same insurance that all other attaching entities obtain, the bill 
seeks to cap the potential liability of municipalities attaching facilities to utility poles at $400,000 
1 MPUC Docket No. 2023-00063, RRPT Decision, March 17,2023
based on section 8105 of the l\/laine Tort Claims Act (”|\/ITCA), even though the MTCA expressly 
allows municipalities to purchase insurance above the $400,000 limit (14 l\/l.R.S. § 8116). Allowing 
municipal attachers to utility poles to cap their liability at $400,000 will shift the burden and risk 
associated with personal injury, death, and property damage claims onto pole owners and other 
entities attaching to poles, particularly in high value claims where $400,000 may be insufficient to 
cover an injured party's injuries. it is common practice for claimants and litigants to assert claims 
against other parties when the responsible party's liability is capped. if this risk is shifted, then it is 
likely that the insurance costs for pole owners and other entities attaching to poles will increase. 
While proponents of LD 1223 will claim that this risk is minimized by the requirement thata 
municipality's contractor working on utility poles carry the minimum coverage required by the 
pole owner and names the municipality as an additional insured, that claim is misleading. First, it 
would be highly unusual for the contractor's insurance to provide insurance coverage for claims 
that do not arise from the contractor's actions; this means that if a claim does not arise from the 
contractor's actions, or if the contractor's insurer takes the position that there is no coverage, 
then the municipality would only have $400,000 available to compensate an injured party ina 
high value claim. Second, if the municipality's contractor terminated their agreement with the 
municipality and the municipality could not find a new contractor, then there is a risk that the 
Town would only have $400,000 available to compensate an injured party. Finally, it appears the 
proponents of this bill are conflating "additional insured" status with a party's status as an 
insurance ”certificate holder." A certificate holder is simply provided with proof of insurance, 
while a named additional insured is entitled to coverage under an insurance policy. Notably, in 
the aforementioned Rapid Response Complaint before the Commission, when the Town of 
Somerville proposed the requirement that its contractor's insurance grant additional insured 
status to the town and C|Vl P, the contractor's insurer offered to make the Town and Cl\/IP 
"certificate holders" under the policy. 
It is simply good public policy to require those who own facilities attached to utility poles to be 
responsible for the risks associated with their facilities. LD 1223 would allow municipalities to 
avoid that responsibility, shift their risk onto other pole owners and attachers, and give 
municipalities an unfair competitive advantage. 
Thank you for your consideration.
