Nicole Grohoski P.O. Box 1732 
Senator, District 7 if- ‘1=," , Ellsworth, ME 04605 .'"- in __ 
ilk av; 
AYHBS 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 1223, “An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and Insurance in the 
Joint Use of Public Utility Equipment ” 
Before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
10 May 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and fellow members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. As you know, my name is Nicole 
Grohoski and I am honored to represent the 22 communities of Senate District 7. I am here in 
support of LD I223, “An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and Insurance in the Joint Use of 
Public Utility Equipment. ” 
In the past few years, we have made great efforts to expand high-speed internet to more Mainers. 
As the pace of public, private, and public-private investments in infrastructure increases, we are 
able to see what is working well and what issues still need to be resolved. 
This bill amendment addresses one such impediment — that is, the legal inability of 
municipalities to acquire millions of dollars of insurance coverage for pole attachments. In some 
instances, pole owners are requiring municipalities to cany coverage for attaching infrastructure 
to poles, despite the fact that the municipalities contract for this work, and their contractors cany 
adequate insurance coverage. 
Maine’s statutory liability protection for public entities (the Maine Tort Claims Act) does not 
currently provide for the coverage level being required by pole owners — its maximum is 
$400,000. Thus, the proposed amendment establishes that the Maine Tort Claims Act covers any 
potential liability resulting from municipal attachments to utility poles. This is similar to how it 
covers other types of governmental liability for construction and facilities management. 
In conclusion, I want to thank the stakeholders who helped me redraft this bill to accomplish the 
goal, but in a more precise and effective Way. I hope that we can help clear up this issue so that 
connnunities that are ready to move forward with broadband installations may do so. Thank you 
for your attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (207) 287-I515 * Fax (Z07) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * l I Y 711 
Nicole.Grohosl<i@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.maine.gov/senate
