 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Support of  
LD 1223, An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and Insurance in the Joint Use of Public Utility 
Equipment  
  
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee.  My name is Rebecca Lambert , and I am submitting testimony in 
support of LD 1223 on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders elected by their peers to serve on the 
Association’s Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish positions on bills of municipal interest.   
 I want to extend the Association’s gratitude to Sen. Grohoski for agreeing to sponsor LD 
1223 on behalf of MMA’s Legislative Policy Committe e, as well as to all the interested parties 
that provided feedback in advance of the public hearing to improve the legislation.     
As we have stated before in testimony on similar bills, there is an inequity that exists not 
only with respect to the qualit y of broadband service, but to access as well, which needs to be 
addressed.  Broadband access is becoming more vitally important to our individual health and economic prosperity and as the state becomes more dependent on electronic connectivity, 
improved a ccess will become increasingly important to avoid adding to the existing inequities.  
A decade ago, in 2013, the EUT Committee and Maine Legislature approved legislation 
(Resolve 2013, Ch. 28) that created a “Working Group To Study Issues Relating to Broadband 
Infrastructure Deployment.”   Despite all the progress that has been made over the past decade, 
this Committee knows it has not been enough, and there is still much work left to do to pr ovide 
reliable, affordable internet to large swaths of the state, as evidenced by the creation of the Maine Connectivity Authority in recent years.  
Unlike in other states, utilities in Maine have long had access to public property – i.e., 
state and munici pal rights of way – at no cost, save for the nominal charge of initial pole 
placement permits. In 2019, in response to a bill advanced by the MMA Legislative Policy Committee and sponsored by Sen. Vitelli, this Committee and the Legislature recognized it w as 
unjust for utilities to be exacting installation (make ready) and rental (attachment) charges on municipalities to attach broadband facilities to utility poles, when those poles are located on municipal property practically free of charge.  
 

Public Law 2019, Ch. 127 established a compromise: municipalities would pay the ongoing and 
not insubstantial attachment charges, but they would not be subject to make ready charges. A basis for this compromise was that the make ready charges were highly inconsistent , and so 
varied that they could be described as arbitrary at best and discriminatory at worst.  
Despite this compromise, more work is necessary as municipal officials  now face a new 
barrier , which is millions of dollars’ worth of insurance coverage, demanded by utilities to be 
carried by municipalities beyond what Maine’s statutory liability protection for public entities (the Maine Tort Claims Act) covers.  
The compromise amendment in  LD 1223 addresses this latest hurdle . Its language is 
succinct, and the purpose is clear. The proposed amendment establishes that the Maine Tort Claims Act covers any potential liability resulting from municipal attachments to utility poles, just as it does for practically every other type of governmental liability that comes into play with construction and facilities management.  
Adding the proposed subsection 3 to Title 35- A, section 2524, will remove this 
unnecessary hurdle standing in the way of Maine’s broadband expansion efforts. Moreover, it is fair; property taxpayers s hould not be on the hook for utilities’ own insurance obligations.  
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about the Association’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kdufour@memun.org or 1 -800-452-8786.  
 
 
