 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1223 
" An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and Insurance in the Joint Use of Public Utility Equipment (as mended)" 
May 9, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology, my name is Simon Thorne and I am here today on behalf of Consolidated 
Communications in opposition to LD 1223, “An Act to Clarify Cost Allocations and Insurance in the Joint 
Use of Public Utility Equipment (as amended).”  
 
Performing work on poles can be dangerous work. Pole work involves work high in the air with hazards 
present as well as the presence of high voltage lines.  It requires significant attention to detail and safety 
protocols and has significant risk to both human life and property. Due to the nature of this work, pole 
owners require specific insurance coverage for any party wishing to attach or perform work on utility 
poles. This is meant to protect the attaching party as well as the pole owner and other attachers on the 
pole.  
 
While Consolidated Communications supports the expansion of broadband and strives to facilitate 
efficient pole attachments, LD 1223 would allow one class of attachers to transfer risk from themselves 
to the pole owning utilities. It could leave potentially serious gaps in coverage and in the event of a 
serious accident leave claims unsatisfied, which means either the claimants may not fully recover losses 
at the hands of the municipal entities seeking to provide broadband or cause a claimant to seek 
recovery from the pole owning utility for the significant deficiency of appropriate insurance coverage for 
municipalities and their private contractors in lieu of a reliance on §8105 and §8103 of Title 14. These 
statutory provisions do not anticipate the significant risk to human health or property that is associated 
with the pole-attachment process.  
 
Functionally, this bill transfers liability from the municipalities doing the work to pole owning utilities. 
This shift of responsibility could have the effect of increasing costs to all rate payers verses the 
companies that actually have control over the performance of the work. This is not good policy. Making 
all rate payers in Maine responsible for acts or omissions of certain parties is an inappropriate risk and 
ultimately a cost shift. All attaching entities that take on the risk involved with work on poles should 
carry an appropriate amount of insurance to ensure that the company actually liable for any action pays 
for such potential negligence.   
 
Consolidated Communications believes that both the network owner (the municipality) as well as the 
attaching party (the contractor) should be required to obtain the requisite amount of insurance 
coverage necessary to cover the potential risks of the pole-attachment process. Shifting this obligation 

from the municipality to a contractor in reliance of these two provisions in Title 14 only shifts the cost; it 
does not extinguish the liability of a municipal party during this process.  
 
For these reasons, we would urge the committee to vote ought not to pass. We would be pleased to 
provide more information at the work session upon your request. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
