sapp' 
Testimony of Sappi North America in support of 
LD 698, "An Act Directing the Public Utilities Commission to Study the State Natural Gas Supply 
Pursuant to the Maine Energy Cost Reduction Act" 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, & Technology 
l\/larch 8, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and l\/lembers of the Joint 
Standing Committee of Energy, Utilities and Technology. Thank you for the opportunity 
to testify in support of LD 698, ”An Act Directing the Public Utilities 
Commission to Study the State Natural Gas Supply Pursuant to the 
Maine Energy Cost Reduction Act." 
l am Bob Dorko, a resident of Skowhegan, and the utilities and recovery manager at the 
Sappi North America Somerset lVlill. 
Sappi employs over 1000 people in l\/laine with two large industrial sites, one of which is 
the largest pulp and paper mill in the state, a research and development center in 
Westbrook and a shared services center in South Portland. 
Sappi is in favor of LD 698, especially as proposed to be amended by the sponsor. Energy 
is a fundamental resource for the manufacturing at our facilities and at many others in 
the state. We strive to use as much renewable energy as possible. We rely on the ISO- 
NE grid for purchased electricity and the New England natural gas piping infrastructure 
to supplement our energy needs. The lack of natural gas pipeline capacity in New 
England is being felt powerfully by gas users; at SAPPI we see it in our electrical 
purchase pricing and in direct gas purchases for onsite use in our paper mill, pulp mill 
lime kiln, and boiler areas. Natural Gas is critical to SAPPI. 
201565281
The Committee is well aware of the ISO-NE system reliability challenges on 24 
December 2022. Considerable amounts of fuel oil had to be burned to stabilize the New 
England power grid. Adequate natural gas capacity would have resulted in lower CO2 
emissions and lower costs for all users. SAPPI was able to export power onto the 
Central Maine Power system during this regional ISO-NE crisis, helping the overall grid 
and climate situation. We are all in this together. 
LD 698 requires more effort to improve on natural gas capacity in lV|aine. Additional 
pipeline capacity should lower the cost of natural gas for New England users, hopefully 
making us comparable in cost and emissions with other regions of the United States. 
Disproportionate fuel costs puts |V|aine manufacturing in general at an economic 
disadvantage relative to the balance of the U.S. and at a disadvantage within their own 
companies in competing internally on capital investment decisions. We have announced 
a major investment at Somerset. Energy costs were a major consideration for the 
decision on our project. Fortunately for my counterparts at the mill, and the lvlainers 
benefited by our operations such as in our supplier-related jobs, other factors made up 
for the energy disadvantage and we are doing the project at Somerset. We are very 
excited about this project but lowering energy costs will only increase chances of future 
investments. 
Hopefully LD 698 catalyzes efforts that help with the natural gas situation for us and all 
l\/lainers. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 698. 
201565281
