
Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 698
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT Committee
Does LD 698 have a purpose? 
Obviously, the PUC can't forecast natural gas supply and prices for Maine or New 
England. They proved that with their estimate of savings from selecting King Pine 
Wind and LS Power for Aroostook County. They are so unsure about their estimate 
that they will not disclose the terms offered by King Pine.
You can't get more natural gas from southern New England. They can't build any 
more natural gas pipelines or compressor stations or upgrades to compressor stations, 
thanks to environmental activists, some who offer their brilliant ideas to this 
committee. 
But, alas, Maine is already getting more natural gas to increase operation of existing 
Maine sited plants.. Since 2019 Maine electric output from instate natural gas plants 
has increased 105% ( 1,797,270 Megawatt hours to 3,687,309 megawatt hours) All 
this production increase was from 4 Maine plants. ( Androscoggin Energy, 
Independence Station, Rumford Power and Westbrook Energy Center)
 Isn't it coincidental that Calpine was bitterly fighting the NECEC project?  Perhaps 
someone could ask Calpine what they knew was coming if NECEC was stopped.
You may ask yourself "Why is Maine output from in-state natural gas-fired plants 
going up 105% in three years?" Maybe Southern New England has figured out that 
electricity moves at nearly the speed of light and Maine ratepayers can afford the 
price of additional RGGI carbon allowances as Massachusetts  gets greener from 
reducing the burning of natural gas.
Maybe, the PUC calculated the savings from King Pine on the basis of ISO-NE 
wholesale price spikes of late 2022. Maybe they should recalculate the savings on 
current wholesale prices ( Down 66% since January 2022 and down 58% since 
December 2022) Maybe, they should just disclose the pricing terms from King Pine to
the public who is underwriting this project through their electric bills and tax 
payments.
Maybe, you will ask yourself " Are the larger power consuming states in New 
England playing a shifting game against the smaller states?" Maybe this "all for one 
and one for all " pact has unintended consequences.
Maybe all these proposed studies are just deflection maneuvers to keep the people 
quiet. I don't think the people will be fooled by this "CONCEPT"
I think the current plan-non-plan isn't working. People pay more for electricity, and 
Maine gets less GREEN. 
You may consider Canada as a source of natural gas, but, SOB, they have already 
offered 1200 megawatts of 24/7 hydro power for transfer to Lewiston,Maine. 
CHASING CARBON ZERO IS FUTILE
GET OUT OF ISO-NE AS FAST AS YOU CAN. GET NECEC PASSED. SAVE 
MAINE
Dan McKay    Dixfield

