" 
‘__ ,':=r; 'f pi“ H STATE OF MAINE 
*2 
PUBLIC UTlLlTlES COMMlSSlON1 
,¢ _ _ ‘_l.
' 
.- . '' 
Philip L Bartlett, ll- . r Harry Lahphear 
CHAIRMAN ‘ ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
_ Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
' 
Neither for Nor Against . 
LD 698, An Act To Reduce the Cost of Energy in Maine and Reduce Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions Through the Effective Use of Bridge Fuels’ 
_ March 8, 2023 , 
_u 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 698, An Act To Reduce the Cost of Energy in Maine and Reduce Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Through the Effective" Use of Bridge Fuels on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission. 
Baclgggound on the Act 
The Maine Energy Cost Reduction Act (Act) was enacted during the First Regular Session of the 126*!‘ 
Legislature to address the natural gas and electricity price volatility, especiallyin periods of extreme cold, 
due to interstate pipeline capacity constraints into the State. The Act, which was further amended in the 
127m Legislature, allowed the Commission to execute an energy cost reduction contract (ECRC)1 ora 
physical energy storage contract (PBS C)2 and included requirements that the Commission would need to 
meet before executing either _ of these contracts. It allowed the Commission to execute a contract, or direct 
a transmission and distribution utility, a gas utility or natural gas pipeline utility, to execute an ECRC or 
PESC if during an adjudicatory proceeding certain determinations were made by the Commission. 
2016, in Docket No. 2,014-00071, although there were two proposals the Commission found to meet the' 
statutory requirements and would provide beneﬁt to ratepayers, the Commission suspended further 
activities regarding the development and review of an ECRC pending future developments in other New 
England States, recognizing the projects could not realistically be viable with Maine’s support alone..3 In 
its order, the Commission also required project status reports every six months to assist the Commission 
in monitoring regional developments. The Commission ’s authority to execute a PESC contract r‘ 
terminated on June 1, 2017, and an ECRC on December 31, 2020. "A 
LD 698 
LD 698 proposes to amend the Act to include additional directives for the Commission and it repeals the 
limitation on the Commission ’s authority to execute an ECRC or a PESC. In unallocated language, it 
1 
An energy cost reduction contract means a contract executed in accordance with chapter 19 to procure capacity ona 
natural gas transmission pipeline, including, when applicable, compression capacity. 
2 A physical energy storage contract means a contract executed in accordance with chapter 19 for liquiﬁed natural gas 
storage capacity. 
3 
The Commission ﬁndings of beneﬁcial projects was conditioned on participation of other states in New England for 
those state’s share of the load. 
Y !'\I1 . .-“ﬂaw "/11 .1 - 1-.- _, n_u,_._u \ m I\A'\AP'1' 
‘LKATT . 10 ci ~.. 'r.r........ c\¢..¢:.... :i........».. 1.n:m1':'n limo
PUC Testimony —LD 698 March 8, 2023 
further requires the Commission to take speciﬁc actions in undertaking its responsibilities under the Act. 
While the Commission agrees that electricity prices would be lower if Maine was not faced with natural 
gas constraints, We have some concerns with the language in LD 698. Several of the directives in LD 698 
are for activiﬁes not within the Cornmission ’s jurisdiction or authority. Any development of interstate 
pipeline infrastructure is Within the jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). 
Inﬂuencing permitting processes and decisions of other state agencies or local pennitling authorities is 
outside of the pmview of a quasi-judicial independent agency, such as the Commission. While the 
coordination eﬁorts with other states required by LD 698 could be initiated by the Commission, other 
state entities may be better suited to do drive a regional policy initiative of this type. 
LD 698 also requires the Commission to monitor proceedings at FERC. The Commission already 
undertakes this monitoring as it relates to therate cases for interstate pipelines that serve Maine’s local 
distribution companies for natural gas. _- 
Lastly, We are concerned With the timing of the investigation, and research and planﬁing requirements in‘ 
section 5 of LD 698. To report back before February 1, 2024, on the possibility of constructing additional 
natural gas capacity after investigation through regional organizations; contracting with the University of 
Maine or another entity for a report on existing and near-tenn replacement energy sources for natural gas 
in commercial and industrial settings; and then to coordinate with the Governor ’_s Energy Oifrce, the_ 
Efficiency Maine Trust and other stakeholder and develop speciﬁc recommendations relating to these 
alternatives is not feasible to meaningfully complete in less than six months. A status update at that time 
would be more workable. ~ ‘' 
The Commission is happy to Work with the sponsor and other stakeholders to better understand the 
expectations of the Commission in relation to LD 698 and perhaps reﬁne the directives imposed upon the 
Commission by this proposed legislation. ~ 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session._
