Testimony in Opposition to LD 698, An Act to Reduce the Cost of Energy in Maine and 
Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions Through the Effective use of Bridge Fuels
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology
by Jack Shapiro, Climate and Clean Energy Program Director
March 8, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and honorable members Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology: My name is Jack Shapiro. I am the Climate and Clean Energy 
Director at the Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more than 60 
years to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, and I am here today on behalf of 
our 25,000 members and supporters to testify in opposition to LD 698, An Act to Reduce the 
Cost of Energy in Maine and Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions Through the Effective use of 
Bridge Fuels.
This bill is clearly well-intentioned and aimed at critical issues: reducing costs for Mainers and 
creating a more secure energy future for our state and our region. We share those goals. 
However, our opposition to this bill is based on the fact that pursuing expanding natural gas 
infrastructure and our commitment to gas as a fuel for heating and power generation will not 
result in either reduced costs or reduced greenhouse gas emissions.
With regard to emissions: Natural gas creates significant carbon dioxide emissions when burned, 
but just as important, natural gas is largely composed of methane. Methane is a climate super-
pollutant. It traps more than 80 times more heat in our atmosphere than carbon dioxide over the 
first 20 years after it reaches the atmosphere1 – the same timescales in which Maine's greenhouse 
gas emissions reduction targets – set by the Legislature – must be met.
Methane leaks. It leaks from pipelines, from storage facilities, from distribution mains, from 
service lines, and from appliances within the home. Multiple studies have shown that these leaks 
are systematically undercounted – including by the EPA methodology currently used in Maine’s 
greenhouse gas accounting.23 This poses a significant threat to Maine’s ability to meet our 
statutorily required greenhouse gas reduction goals.
1 https://www.iea.org/reports/methane-tracker-2021/methane-and-climate-change 
2 https://www.science.org/content/article/major-us-cities-are-leaking-methane-twice-rate-previously-believed 
Building new natural gas infrastructure will not reduce costs in the long-term. It will create new 
risks of stranded assets and expectations from investors that business as usual must continue to 
have ratepayers pay for their infrastructure investments even as they become obsolete. If we 
spend our time and energy expanding natural gas infrastructure and supply instead of investing in 
clean energy, storage, and a modern grid to support them, it will only make this problem worse 
and more difficult to solve.
Pushing for new natural gas infrastructure in Maine or New England won’t reduce price impacts 
in the short-term either. The recent spikes in natural gas prices, and as a result electricity prices, 
were caused by events far outside of Maine and New England. Natural gas is part of a complex, 
and importantly global, fossil fuel market. We don’t produce natural gas in Maine, and fossil fuel 
producers will always maximize their profits by selling to China, Europe, or wherever they can 
get the best prices, leaving Maine behind.
Crucially, doubling down on this 20th century technology and fuel source is unnecessary. We 
have the technologies in our hands right now to generate electricity at lower cost than gas.4 Heat 
pumps heat homes and businesses at the same or lower costs than gas, and much lower than other 
fossil heating sources.5
As the bill title suggests, reducing the cost of energy and reducing greenhouse gas emissions are 
goals that we share. However pursuing more fossil fuel dependence is not the path to do it.
We recommend the Committee vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 698. Thank you for the 
opportunity to testify, and I’d be happy to answer any questions that you have.
3 https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.0c00437
4 https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/electricity_generation.pdf 
5 https://www.efficiencymaine.com/at-home/heating-cost-comparison/ 
