 
 
Testimony of Jerry E. Livengood  
on behalf of Bangor Natural Gas Company  
 
L.D. 698, “An Act Directing the Public Utilities Commission to Study the State  
Natural Gas Supply Pursuant to the Maine Energy Cost Reduction Act”  
 
March 8, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee.  
 
My name is Jerry E. Livengood.  I am General Manager and President of Bangor Natural Gas 
Company (“Bangor Gas” or the “Company”) , a small local distributi on gas utility serving 
approximately  8,200  customers in the greater Bangor area.  I submit this testimony in support of 
LD 698.  
 
The recent spike in energy prices, beginning in the winter of 2021 -22 have primarily been driven 
by increased U.S. exports in response to increased demand from European countries which 
previously had received natural gas from Russia.  Natural gas remains an efficient and reliable 
source of energy for New England’s wholesale generation fleet.  Natural gas also provides a 
necessary fuel to residential customers for heating and other domestic use s and commercial and 
industrial customers who use it for heating and manufacturing needs.   
 
Although the U.S. is the largest producer of natural gas, Maine  sits at the northernmos t end of a 
pipeline network.  Natural gas prices are the highest in New England due to a lack of pipeline 
infrastructure needed to meet peak demand during the winter.   Building more pipeline capacity 
into New England, as would be made possible by LD 698, would help stabilize energy prices for 
Maine ’s consumers  and would  help the State achieve the goals of legislation that was passed 
almost one decade ago.1  
 
Bangor Gas was a party to the Commission’s investigation by the Commission to d etermine 
whether and how to exercise its authority to reduce energy cost s for Maine and New England 
electric and natural gas utility customers under the provisions of the Maine Energy Cost 
Reduction Act (co dified in  35-A M.R.S. §1901 et seq ) (the “Act ”).2  In this proceeding, the 
Commission found that , in order to resolve pipeline constraints, Maine and other regional 
stakeholders neede d to explore precedent agreements with interstate pipelines, and in 
conjunction with local distribution companies (“LDC s”) or through energy cost reduction 
contracts (“ECRCs”) .   
 
 
1 During its 2013 session, the  Legislature enacted The Maine Energy Cost Reduction Act, P.L. 2013, ch.369, 
codified at 35 -A M.R.S. § 1901 et seq (Act).  
2 Maine Public Utilities Commission, Investigation of Parameters for Exercising Authority Pursuant to the Maine 
Energy Cost Reduction Act, 35 -A M.R.S. §1901, Docket No. 2014 -00071, Order – Phase II (Sep. 14, 2016).  
2 
 The Commission ultimately found that an ECRC proposal  presented i n that procee ding s atisfied 
the requirements of the Act  and decided to move forward with negotiation of a precedent 
agreement with one of the projects for Maine's 9% load share “conditioned upon comparable 
precedent agreements with [the Access Northeast Pipeline projec t] and other New England 
states.” Docket No. 2014 -00071, Phase II Order at 41.  An ECRC ultimately never materialized , 
however, because of the lack of coordination by other New England states.  
 
Natural gas remains the predominant fuel for base load generation in New England , providing 
52% of total generation  in the region.  Nuclear currently provides 26% of total generation.  
Renewables, including, hydro, wind, waste/refuse, wood, solar, landfill gas, methane, and steam, 
comprise approximately 19%  of total generation in the region.   Wind  and solar are currently 
responsible for  approximately 4% and 3% , respectively .  Oil fired generation and coal currently 
comprise 2% and 0.31% , respectively  of the  region ’s total generation .3  
 
Due to their intermittent nature, transitioning to greater amounts of solar and wind renewables 
will increase our reliance on natural gas in the short term.  With the recent retirement of nuclear 
plants  and less efficient fossil fuel units, coupled with the incre ased demand for renewables, 
natural gas fired generation  has increased in recent years and it is expected to continue until the 
region can transition towards more renewables.  Natural gas is the necessary bridge fuel that will 
allow Maine and New Engla nd to ultimately achieve renewable energy goals.  
 
Bangor Gas continues to support the concept of an ECRC that would allow Maine and New 
England to reduce natural gas pipeline constraints.  Lowering the basis differential between 
Maine and the Henry Hub thr ough construction of a new pipeline is the only way to stabilize 
wholesale energy costs, especially during times of peak demand when natural gas fired units 
remain the predominant form of generation.  Increased pipeline capacity will also help 
residential , commercial, and industrial customers who utilize natural gas for heating and other 
needs.   
 
In closing, Bangor Gas supports the goal of reducing energy costs, stabilizing wholesale 
electricity prices, lowering energy costs, and helping Maine (and N ew England ) make further 
advances in renewable generation.   LD 698 will help Maine best coordinate with other New 
England states in achieving these objectives . 
 
 Respectfully submitted,  
 
Jerry E. Livengood  
President & General Manager 
Bangor Natural Gas Company  
 
 
3 Available  online: https://www.iso -ne.com/about/key -stats/resource -mix 

