 
20168465.1 
TESTIMONY  OF MICHAEL  PETERS  
MESSER  LLC 
 
IN SUPPORT  OF  
 
LD 698, AN ACT TO REDUCE  THE COST  OF ENERGY  IN MAINE  THROUGH  EFFECTIVE USE 
OF BRIDGE  FUELS  AND  REDUCTION OF GREENHOUSE  GAS  EMISSIONS 
 
Joint  Standing  Committee on Energy,  Utilities  and Technology  
March  8, 2023  
 
Senator  Lawrence,  Representative  Zeigler, and members  of the Joint  Standing Committee  
on Energy,  Utilities  and Technology:  
My name is Mike  Peters,  and I am a manager  of energy  for Messer  LLC.  Messer  is a global  
producer  of indust rial gases;  here in Maine,  we have  an air separation plant  in Kittery  which  
separates  air cryogenically  to produce  liquid  oxygen,  nitrogen and argon.  Customers  throughout  
New England use our products,  including hospitals,  electronics  and semiconductor  manufacturers,  
and customers  in the food and beverage,  pulp and paper  and pharmaceutical  industries.  
As it is for other  industrial  energy  consumers,  electric  power  is critical to Messer.  We are in 
a highly  competitive  industry,  and our ability to compete  is affected  by the cost of the electricity  we 
need to operate our facility.  We need electricity  to be affordable and competitive : electric  power  
costs  represent  over two-thirds  of our variable  operating cost,  so we do all we can to minimize  our 
power  costs , and we highly  value the ability  to control  our load during the monthly  peak  to minimize  
our costs for regional  transmission  service.  Because the cost of electricity  is crucial  to our 
business,  we need our state  to act intentionally  to cut the cost of electricity  to consumers.   
Over  a decade ago, the Legislature and the PUC determined that expanding natural  gas 
pipeline capacity  into New England would  support  Maine’s  economic  development  needs  and 
achieve measurable and sustainable reductions  in the emissions  of greenhouse gas emissions,  
but since  then state  efforts  to expand gas pipeline capacity  have stalled.  Meanwhile,  the region 
continues  to rely on carbon- intense oil and even  coal to keep  the lights  on – not for lack of gas, but 
because pipeline constraints  make gas too expensive to burn for power  when we really  need  it. 
Messer  is fully committed  to reducing and eventually  eliminating  and/or  offsetting our carbon  
footprint  – in fact we have specific  interim  targets  for 2030 – however  we believe Maine,  and the 
rest of the U.S.,  needs to make  a cost-effective transition,  rather  than a transition  at any cost.   
Frankly,  energy  intensive  users,  as well as all electric  consumers,  need  relief  from the sharp  
energy  price  increases  during stretches  of cold weather.   Fortunately  this winter  those cold snaps  
have been relatively  short  lived.   However,  besides  the strong  price  volatility  caused  by natural  gas 
20168465.1 constraints,  we face a much  more  sustained future  impact  from the implementation of LD1711 and 
thus need  any means  possible  to counter  that substantial  impact.  
We already  know  how to solve  this problem.  LD 698 would  make  it official state  policy,  with 
the force  of law, that the PUC pursue all appropriate avenues  to tackle  gas pipeline constraints,  
including working  with other  states,  interstate  pipeline  operators,  pipeline capacity  holders  and 
other  natural  gas stakeholders  in New England.  This would  bring electricity  consumers  the cost 
relief  we need , it would  result  in less volatility  in natural  gas and electric  pricing,  it would  provide for 
a higher  level of energy  security  for New England,  and it would  reduce  the need to burn significant  
amounts  of higher  carbon emitting  oil during  times  of natural  gas constraints . Thank  you for your 
consider ation of this testimony.  
