33 McAlister Farm Rd. 
Suite 102
Portland, ME  04103
info@mainemfg.com
P: 207-747-4406
www.mainemfg.com 
Manufacturers Association of Maine
8 March 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology.  My name is 
Mike Roughton, I am a resident of Standish and I serve as the Executive 
Director of the Manufactures Association of Maine.  
We testify today in support of LD 698, An Act Directing the Public Utilities 
Commission to Study the State Natural Gas Supply Pursuant to the Maine 
Energy Cost Reduction Act.
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a non-partisan 501(c)6 
non-profit grounded in service to its membership, providing a network of 
resources designed to support the strategic business growth needs of Maine 
manufacturing entrepreneurs.  Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, 
employing almost 60,000 individuals in military and defense, aerospace, metal 
fabrication, paper, boat building, semi-conductor, wood products, 
aquaculture and biotech, medical device, composites and bioplastics, as well 
as the food and beverage industries.  These businesses represent almost 10% 
of Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all the wages paid in the state on a 
weekly basis.  MAME’s mission is to help manufacturing grow and succeed 
and supports Maine’s development of future manufacturing through a variety 
of programs.
MAME’s advocacy efforts focus on four (4) key areas: workforce development, 
taxation, human resources/wage and hour and energy.  It is this last policy 
area we’d like to focus on today.  As you are likely aware, manufacturing is 
energy intensive, and our members are acutely aware of rising prices.  While 
some MAME members have locked in lower prices over the last few years, 
many of these contracts are due to expire soon.  There is rarely a day that 
passes where our members aren’t staring at a doubling or three-fold increase 
in electricity prices just around the corner.  One of our members experienced 
electricity rising from a monthly spend of $850 to $2,300 virtually overnight.  
One of the larger businesses sees its annual spend doubling this year from 
$1,000,000 to twice that.  For any business, these prices could be crippling.  
For members with set contracts for their goods and services, there is no ability 
to pass along these increases, which only adds to the risk of our 
manufacturers being able to stay in business.  
Stabilization and reduction of natural gas supply and pricing to Maine 
businesses would have a significantly positive impact on the viability of these 2023 Executive BOARD
Chair of the Board 
Judith Borelli
Texas Instruments
Vice Chair of the Board, &
Legislative Chair
Dave Fortin 
Kennebec Technologies
Treasurer & Investment Chair
Samantha Pedersen
Albin, Randall & Bennett
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair
Neal Prescott
Prescott Associates
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair
Alan LaPoint
The Strainrite Companies
Executive Director
Mike Roughton
Document1
Page 2entities. . . not only through direct natural gas pricing, but also its directly 
impact on electricity costs.  This is particularly so for those companies who 
provide products and/or services in markets beyond Maine, where energy 
pricing is lower or more stable.
It is anticipated that the LD698 would promote and incentivize improvements 
in supply and pricing in the longer term.  In addition to this initiative, MAME 
would also propose the necessity to link this initiative with shorter-term, 
present-day legislation to mitigate the price increase experienced recently.  If 
businesses are too negatively impacted in the short term, the longer-term 
benefits may not be sufficient to offset the immediate harm.
While LD 698 may not offer an immediate fix to the situation, the policies and 
goals that it pursues are laudable.  Maine has many positive attributes, but 
being furthest away from natural gas supplies and at the end of pipelines that 
run through other mor populated areas are clear disadvantages.  Any action 
to increase the natural gas supply to the state should be reviewed and 
pursued in order to stem the unfortunate tide many of our members currently 
find themselves in.  
On behalf of the Manufacturers Association of Maine, we hope the committee 
will support LD 698 as amended.  
