Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Opposition To
LD 480 - An Act to Clarify Laws Regarding the Placement of Signs on Public Ways
March 23, 2023
Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams and distinguished members of the Transportation Committee, my 
name is Rebecca Graham, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 480, An Act to Clarify Laws 
Regarding the Placement of Signs on Public Ways, on behalf of MMA’s 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC) who are elected by their selectboards and councils in Maine’s 35 senate district to 
establish positions on legislation impacting municipalities with the broadest understanding of the 
difference in impacts of policy on these vital services in all areas of the state. 
As draft, LD 480 creates a mandate on municipal government and thus requires the addition of 
the mandate preamble. The bill requires a municipality that removes a temporary sign under their existing 
authority not only to seek an owner of a sign, but also provide a written explanation of how to install a 
temporary sign in a place where to be complaint when simply may not be appropriate in that area entirely. 
Additionally, if the owner of the sign has not marked the temporary sign in the way they are 
required, the bill directs the municipality to determine the ownership of the land which the sign was 
placed, assuming it is not within the public right of way, and if not send a notice to the landowner. 
Municipalities do not remove signs from private property unless it is a sign ordinance violation and notice 
of the violation of the sign ordinance has been received in the same way any other land use planning 
violation would be handled. The public way belongs to the municipalities that maintain them for public 
purpose. 
Temporary signs in the public way that are not properly labeled, as required by statute, should not 
create a mandate on municipal government to sleuth out the violator and provide them with written 
instructions on how to comply. If their sign does not include the statutorily required name and contact 
information on the removed temporary sign, the individual is unlikely to benefit from additional written 
instructions from a municipal official. 
Additionally, a public safety hazard as defined by the bill narrows the ways in which signs can be 
deemed distracting to drivers. Public safety officials, road commissioners and public works professionals 
are best capable to determine the distracting nature of a sign. One study found that even roadside safety 
billboards may actually cause 17K traffic accidents a year:
 https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abm3427
Offensive content is equally distracting to drivers and while it may be possible to be placed in 
some locations, near intersections or high traffic areas, the sign content itself can be a public safety 
hazard. By narrowing the points that trigger removal for public safety purposes, this bill would further 
limit the ability for municipal officials to address all possible public safety concerns temporary signs 
create. 
For all these reasons, officials as that you vote ought not to pass on LD 480. 
 
