PINE TREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE, INC. 
Emma Hulas-0’Conn0r, Esq. * Portland Area Ojﬁce 
P.O. Box 547 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 400-3226 * V/TTY 711 ¢ Fax (207) 828-2300 
www.ptla. org * ehalas0c0nnor@ptla. org 
Testimony of Emma Halas-O’Connor, Pine Tree Legal Assistance in OPPOSITION to LD 
1015, Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Foreclosure Process 
April 3, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Emma Halas-O’Connor and I am the Homeowner Assistance Fund, or HAF, 
Foreclosure Prevention Attorney at Pine Tree Legal Assistance. I am testifying today in 
opposition to LD 1015. 
Pine Tree Legal Assistance is a nonprofit legal services provider with offices in Portland, 
Lewiston, Augusta, Bangor, Machias, and Presque Isle. Since 1967, Pine Tree has represented 
low-income Mainers in a wide variety of civil legal matters including foreclosure cases. During 
the national foreclosure crisis in 2009, Pine Tree worked closely with legislators and the Maine 
courts as Maine developed its Foreclosure Diversion Program (FDP), which helps homeowners 
explore alternatives to losing their homes to foreclosure. 
A major focus of my work at Pine Tree involves helping homeowners who are at risk of 
foreclosure to access newly-available funds called the Homeowner Assistance Fund or HAF. 
HAF was established by the 2021 federal American Rescue Plan Act and implemented by the 
U.S. Treasury. Maine received approximately 42 million dollars to provide to homeowners 
impacted by Covid-19 who are struggling with payments. The program is administered at the 
state level by Maine State Housing Authority and provides grants of up to $50,000 to eligible 
households to get caught up on mortgage payments, property tax arrears, and utility assistance. ‘ 
It is both because of the continued success of the FDP program, and the emergence of HAF asa 
new option to swiftly resolve a foreclosure case, that I believe an additional study commission to 
review Maine’s foreclosure process is unnecessary at this time. 
FDP has been highly successful at resolutions of cases that keep homeowners in their homes 
while restoring their loans to a performing status, according to the annual data submitted to this 
Committee from the Maine Judicial Branch? The FDP is only available where the property in 
‘ See haf.mainehousing.org for details about the HAF program. 
2 For the most recent annual report, see State of Maine Judicial Branch, Foreclosure Diversion Program 
Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services and the Joint?
foreclosure is the homeowner ’s primary residence; it is not available in cases involving abandoned properties. Contrary to any notion that altering F DP could increase the supply of affordable housing by bringing more properties to the market, F DP plays an important role in keeping homeowners affordably housed. 
FDP connects homeowners to resources that help them navigate the complex options available to homeowners who fall behind on a mortgage. The homeowner meets with a HUD-certi ﬁed housing counselor who provides valuable information about the different workout solutions available, while F DP also connects homeowners with legal or other professional assistance. Demand for the program has held steady since its inception in 2010.3 In 2022, mediation was requested in 32% of the 1,035 new foreclosure cases ﬁled, which is consistent with FDP’s use in pre-pandemic years.4 
The data collected shows that those cases that utilized F DP result in positive outcomes for both homeowner and lender. Between 2010 and 2018, 62% of cases in the FDP concluded in dismissal.5 In 2019, the Maine judiciary analyzed the basis for dismissal in all cases in mediation and found that 84% of those cases dismissed were resolved by a workout option that allowed the homeowner to stay housed and the loan to be restored to performing status, whether through a loan modiﬁcation, paying off the arrears, or a repayment plan.6 There is no indication that FDP is the source of any signiﬁcant delay in resolution of foreclosure cases. To the contrary, F DP provides mechanisms to hold all parties accountable to deadlines for exchanging information necessary to efﬁciently evaluate workout options; if a homeowner is unresponsive to these deadlines, FDP can be terminated and the case restored to the docket. 
As I mentioned, one important workout option still relatively new to homeowners at risk of foreclosure is the Homeowner Assistance Fund, or HAF program. I agree with those who have pointed out that the current snapshot of foreclosure case timelines is skewed by the pandemic- caused backlog that has impacted nearly all types of civil matters. The HAF program, which has only begun to be frilly onboarded in Maine in the past month, is also changing the foreclosure landscape. 
HAF can provide an especially speedy resolution in foreclosure cases. I have seen mortgage lenders receive HAF funds in just three weeks from the time the homeowner initially applies. 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, I31“ Legislature (February l0, 2023), available at: https:/flcgislalure.muinc.gov/doc/072i). 
3 
See State of Maine Judicial Branch, Foreclosure Diversion Program Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services and the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 129"‘ Legislature (February I4, 2020), available at: 
https://www.courts.maine.gov/about/reports/fdp-report-20l9.pdf 
“ See 2022 FDP Report, footnote 1, at p. 4; for an annual percentage of cases where FDP was requested, see 2019 FDP Report, footnote 2, at 3. 
5 
See State of Maine Judicial Branch, Foreclosure Diversion Program Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services and the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 129"‘ Legislature, at 5 (February 14, 2020), available at: 
https://www.courts.maine.gov/about/reports/fdp-report 2019.pdf. 
6 Ia’.
Lately, most of the HAF program’s delays that I have observed are caused by servicers failing to 
timely submit information to the HAF administrator necessary to process payment. 
HAF has quickly become one of the most important tools to bring homeowners ’ loans current 
while also preserving their affordability. That is because in the current enviromnent of rapidly 
rising mortgage interest rates, it has become more difficult for homeowners to get caught up on 
their mortgages using the workout options that servicers have traditionally provided. Those 
options, called loan modifications, often result in higher monthly mortgage payments because the 
modiﬁed loan comes with the current, usually higher, interest rate. With HAF, a homeowner who 
is less than $50,000 in arrears can get funds to pay off the whole back balance all at once, 
bringing the homeowner fully current while preserving the homeowner ’s existing monthly 
payment. 
It is likely that with HAF fully operating now, the timelines of many foreclosure cases will 
shorten, and many cases will resolve before the parties reach the FDP stage. It is important to 
remember that HAF is a temporary program: in several states that implemented HAF more 
quickly than Maine did, funding has already run out. If LD 1015 passes, any changes proposed 
by a new study commission based on the current environment will be of limited utility because it 
would be viewing how foreclosure cases work under a temporary funding program with an 
unknown duration. 
Because Maine’s Foreclosure Diversion Program has a proven track record of achieving positive 
outcomes for all parties in foreclosure cases, and with the unique environment produced by the 
new availability of HAF funds, it is not the right time to be proposing new changes to Maine’s 
judicial foreclosure process. I respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought not to Pass. Thank 
you for your consideration and I am happy to answer any of your questions.
