    
1 
  
Testimony of 
Erik C. Jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
 
Before 
The Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, April 3 2023 
 
Neither For Nor Against 
 
L.D. 1015 " Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Foreclosure Process " 
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, I 
am Erik Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State 
Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony neither for nor against L.D. 
1015 "Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Foreclosure Process ". 
 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing.  We are authorized to issue bonds to 
finance single family mortgages for first time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing.   
 
MaineHousing works with Maine banks to provide first-time homebuyer mortgages, and we are 
proud that our foreclosure rate is currently just under ½ of a percent. This rate fluctuates, but is 
generally very low, and we attribute this in large part to working with a loan servicer who shares our 
non-profit, public-purpose approach to lending.  We also engage in aggressive intervention with 
borrowers who begin to fall behind in payments, as well as early workouts, which can preserve 
homeowners’ ability to remain in their homes. And now, we administer the federal Homeowner 
Assistance Fund, which can further assist borrowers by eliminating arrearages.  
 
With regard to this bill, our director or their designee is listed as a potential member of this 
commission.  We would be happy to provide such a representative should this commission be 
established. We feel that both our specific experience, as well as our voice on issues relating to lower 
and middle income homebuyers, would be a perspective that will be helpful for such a commission 
to have. We would, however, caution the committee that we are operating at a moment that is 
distorted by both the pandemic and the resulting backlogs in the courts. This may not, in other 
words, be a “normal” time to examine the foreclosure process in Maine. Finally, we would point out 
that there was a study done on this same topic within the last ten years, and there still may be 
recommendations in that report which could be revisited before another commission is established.  
