p HoUSE 0E REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
€““® TTY: (207) 287-4469 
John “Jack” E. Ducharme III 
34 Heald Street 
Madison, ME 04950 
Cell: (207) 431-0775 
Jack Dueharme@legislature.maine.gov 
TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF LD 1015 
Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Foreclosure Process 
APRIL 3, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary- 
My name is Jack Duchaime and I proudly represent the people of Comville, 
Madison, and Norridgewock in the Maine House of Representatives. I come 
before you today to present LD 1015, a Resolve, Establishing the 
Commission to Study the Foreclosure Process. 
Before being elected to the Legislature, I was Regional VP for a local bank 
in Somerset County. I handled both commercial and residential loans. Our 
bank was known for its conservatism and had very few foreclosures. 
However, many other banks are not so fortunate. 
Since the great Real Estate crash of 2008, there have been many laws passed 
to try and protect consumers in part from themselves and their desire to own 
a home regardless of their ability to do So. The regulations that banks have 
to comply with are many, most designed to give the consumer every 
opportunity to remain in the home. However, some are really unable to do 
that. When that situation occurs, the law requires that banks followa 
complicated set of rules combines with disclosures and timelines that many 
times are unnecessary. Some of the rules, While designed to give consumers 
every opportunity to stay in the home, really just prolong the inevitable 
foreclosure action. The rules have been created over time so it seems that 
there is a patchwork of rules in force that sometimes create challenges for 
ﬁnancial institutions and for consumers. In these cases, it would be better 
for the bank and the consumer to complete the foreclosure action quickly so 
that the property can be returned to the market. 
District 71 
Cornville, Madison, and Norridgewock
Once the consumer has moved out, often they ﬁle bankruptcy which further extends the foreclosure action. When the house is vacant, it is often subject to vandalism, theft and damage. It is estimated that for every 6 months that a house is vacant typically costs the bank $10 — 15,000 to repair before they can resell. 
The intent of this bill is a simple one — to bring stakeholders together to examine these rules to see how this process could be streamlined to retum these properties to functional use in a more rapid fashion. According to several local banks, it is worth noting that the current average time to geta property from frst notice of foreclosure to “ready to sell” is about 1,100 days. 
I am not coming forward today with a silver bullet answer that will ﬁx this process. Rather, I am simply asking to start an honest dialogue with all the stakeholders to ﬁnd areas in the foreclosure process that can be improved. 
This Resolve would establish a commission of stakeholders to review the foreclosure process and the rules that govern it. From that analysis, the Commission would be able to propose rule changes or legislative changes that would help move properties back to market quicker while at the same time maintaining consumer protections. The Resolve suggests a commission of 7 as outlined but I think perhaps it would be helpful to include a representative from Maine Consumer Protection and from Maine Municipal Association to provide perspective of the towns that also have issues with foreclosed properties and the banks that ultimately own them. Bringing the total on the commission to 9 would keep it small enough to not be unwieldy and difﬁcult to manage. I would suggest that as an amendment to this legislation. 
Thank you for considering this Resolve and I hope that you will support it.I would be happy to answer any of your questions. 
Cordially, 
Jack Ducharme 
District 7l 
Cornville, Madison, and Norridgewock
