1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 3, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in opposition to L.D. 
1015 Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Foreclosure Process before the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary 
 
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that was 
established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act in 1974. Since 
then, we have provided free legal assistance to our disadvantaged older adults age sixty or 
older when their basic human needs are at stake.  
 
We have represented upwards of 300 older adults over the last three years, all of whom 
were facing the foreclosure of mortgages on their homes. For some of those clients we 
were able to request forbearance and negotiate loan modifications before or during the 
judicial foreclosure process. As a result, they were able to stay in their homes.  
 
In cases where extended services were not provided because their cases lacked merit, we 
helped our clients understand the foreclosure process. This allowed them to make plans for 
obtaining alternative housing or choose to reside in another setting more appropriate for 
their personal needs. We also helped foreclosure clients with other problems that may 
have contributed to the arrearages that caused their mortgages to be in default. Some of 
our services included obtaining tax abatements, resolving consumer debt cases, helping 
them gain access to better health care and prescription drug programs and stopping 
financial exploitation.  
 
During the Pandemic, the federal requirements for lenders/servicers to modify or refinance 
certain loan types under the CARES Act were in force. The intent was that individuals 
with home mortgage burdens could ask their lenders for help restructuring their debt. 
Unfortunately, some lenders and many “mortgage servicers” (business entities who 
collected payments and managed payment issues for themselves or the lenders) were not 
fully committed to making that federal policy decision work. 
 
2 
  
 
 
 
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau described categories of behaviors that 
frustrated consumers and their attorneys at that time. Here are the categories and a link to 
their report: 
 
 “…Providing incomplete or inaccurate information, such as telling consumers that only delinquent 
borrowers qualify for forbearance, that a fee must be paid to obtain forbearance, or that a lump-
sum repayment is required at the end of forbearance;  
 Incorrectly sending collection or default notices, assessing fees, or initiating foreclosures for 
borrowers in forbearance;  
 Changing borrowers’ preauthorized funds transfers without their consent, or failing to implement 
the borrowers’ instructions to freeze payments;  
 Failure to process forbearance requests in a timely manner;  
 Enrolling borrowers in automatic or unwanted forbearance;  
 Failure to enroll borrowers in an appropriate post-forbearance plan. 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_supervisory-highlights_issue-
23_2021-01.pdf  
    
As attorneys, we experience similar difficulties providing legal help both when our clients 
receive a notice of default and after the judicial foreclosure is filed and as the case 
proceeds in the court. Suffice it to say that we are not surprised that not everyone is 
committed to the goal of working in good faith toward solutions that will keep 
homeowners in their homes and ensure the payment of their mortgage debt. However, we 
find that within the judicial process, the mediation opportunity afforded by the Maine 
Judicial Branch’s Foreclosure Diversion Program takes that goal seriously. Mediation is 
significantly helpful especially to homeowners who have the assistance of a lawyer. 
Unfortunately, many consumers who are unrepresented never ask for mediation and those 
who ask and act for themselves have little or no success negotiating with the mortgage 
servicer or the lender. 
 
There is no doubt that Mediation works and that the results benefit both parties in the 
foreclosure case. To get a realistic look at what it can do in normal times it is useful to 
examine the Foreclosure Diversion Programs statistics. Each year the Program Manager 
submits a report to the Judiciary Committee as well as the Health Coverage Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee. Here is the link for their report dated February 12, 2020 
containing the years 2010 (first year of the program) through pandemic free 2018: 
https://www.courts.maine.gov/about/reports/fdp-report-2019.pdf  
 
I have reproduced page 5 of the report beginning on the next page of this testimony for 
your convenience (I have added yellow highlights for emphasis):  
 
3 
  
 
3) Foreclosure Judgment Entered: Cases that are not settled and/or dismissed most 
frequently conclude with a judgment of foreclosure for the plaintiff. 
 
4) Cases Dismissed: When a case is settled or closed without a judgment or trial, it is 
dismissed. Dismissal saves time and resources for parties and for the court. Dismissal 
suggests that the loan is performing again and the home has been retained, or the debt 
has been satisfied by sale or transfer of the property. 
 
To gain the most accurate picture of case resolutions, it is helpful to consider cases 
mediated before 2019 because most of those cases have been completed. Of the 9,396 cases 
mediated in the FDP through 2018, nearly 62% have concluded in dismissal.  
 
Underlying reasons for dismissals of mediated cases are presented in the chart below. 
The court does not currently have an electronic system to track reasons for dismissal of cases. 
However, based on detailed Mediator’s Reports, court pleadings, and clerk docketing, the FDP is 
able to report the reasons for dismissals in 68 (62.4%) of the 109 mediated cases dismissed in 
2019. A majority of those 68 cases (57, or 84%) concluded in settlements that allowed 
homeowners to keep their homes through loan modification, reinstatement, or a repayment plan 
Foreclosure Cases Mediated from 2010 - 2018
16
16 cases  remaining  in FDP  (0.2%)
5,790
61.6%
199 cases  pending  on civil docket  (2.1%)
0.2%
3,391  cases  closed:  foreclosure  judgment  (36.1%)
3,391
36.1%199
2.1%
5,790  cases  dismissed  (61.6%)
4 
  
It is interesting to note that of the 9396 cases that went to mediation over that nine-year 
period, 5790 or 61.6% were resolved without a trial. And at least 1654 or about 28.6% of 
homeowners who participated in mediation kept their homes because of a mutually agreed 
loan modification, reinstatement or a new repayment or forbearance plan. The remaining 
3666 cases or 71.4%were resolved in favor of the lender and did not go to trial. The cases 
that proceeded to a foreclosure judgment were only 3391 or 36.1% of all the cases 
mediated. Whether they all required a trial is unlikely since most cases where there are no 
factual disputes may be resolved more quickly with a summary judgment motion to the 
Court. An additional fact found on page 4 of this same report is that over the life of the 
program the average number of mediation sessions per case is 1.7; it’s fair to say that this 
program is efficient.   
 
The bill before you creates a Commission that will study the foreclosure process and will 
have the duty to report on the topics set out in Section 5.      
    
“Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That in conducting the study the commission shall consider: 
1.  The laws and state agency rules governing the foreclosure process, the various timelines of specific 
procedures in the foreclosure process and how those timelines affect the availability of foreclosed 
properties for affordable housing; 
 
2.  The effect on the foreclosure process of mortgages sold in the secondary mortgage market by large 
financial institutions and the ability of small financial institutions in the State to work to keep property 
owners out of foreclosure and to make foreclosed property available for sale quickly; and 
 
3.  How problems in the foreclosure process can be mitigated without losing existing consumer 
protections.” 
 
We believe that the annual Foreclosure Diversion Program report submitted to this 
Committee and the Health Coverage Insurance and Financial Services Committee since 
the start of the foreclosure diversion process has provided ample opportunity for any party 

5 
 dissatisfied with how the program operates or with a creative idea about how to make it 
better to present those ideas to either one or both Committees.   
 
As importantly we believe that the original enactment of the duty to deliver this report also 
describes what it must contain and also intends that the Committees of Jurisdiction 
determine whether any changes should be made to the program as a result of receiving the 
information in the report: Title 14 Section 6379 A-7(B) says: 
 
(The Court shall…) 
B. Report annually to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over insurance and financial 
services matters and the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over judiciary matters on:   
 
(1) The performance of the program, including numbers of homeowners who are notified of mediation, who attend 
mediation and who receive legal counseling or legal assistance; and   
 
 
(2) The results of the mediation process, including the number of loans restructured, number of principal write-
downs, interest rate reductions and number of homeowners who default on mortgages within a year after 
restructuring, to the extent the court has available information;    
 
C. Notwithstanding subsection 10 , establish a fee upon a foreclosure filing made on or after June 15, 2009 to support 
mediation services to be paid for by the plaintiff; and    
 
D. Make recommendations for any changes to the program to the Legislature.  
  
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/statutes/14/title14sec6321-A.pdf  
 
It is reasonable to think that in the course of reviewing the annual report, this Committee 
could explore with the Program Manager any concerns brought to your attention about the 
performance of the program. Asking for more information from the Court or any of the 
interested parties might add to your understanding of whether or how the program 
performance might be improved. Additionally, you may already have particular knowledge 
of matters that the bill before you expects a Commission to explore or you may wish to 
develop that knowledge within your Committee process. The causes of the civil case 
backlog in our courts come to mind as something in which you are well versed. We 
respectfully submit that asking for a Commission to engage in discussions for matters that 
should be vetted by this Committee in the first instance is premature and may require an 
unnecessary expenditure of time and money.  
 
We are certainly willing to engage in any discussions that you might invite us and other 
interested parties to join. We thank you for the opportunity to make our comments in 
opposition to this bill and hope that you vote it ought not to pass.    
 
