\ 
Good morning members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Wendy Schors. 
I live in East Machias, and I have been employed by Machias Savings Bank for 30 
years. In my time at l\/lachias Savings Bank I have worked in several roles but the 
longest has been my 20 years working with consumers facing a residential 
foreclosure. 
As a Community Bank, Machias Savings Bank is an active and involved part of the 
communities that we serve. As such, we see financial health and wellness asa 
strong part of our role. We work tirelessly with our customers who are facing 
financial hardships to be able to overcome those struggles to avoid foreclosure at 
all costs. Those efforts include payments plans, temporary hardship modifications 
and longer term modifications. Unfortunately, our efforts are not always 
successful and the outcome results in foreclosure. 
As you have heard from Mr. Kany the foreclosure process is very lengthy. One of 
the pieces of the foreclosure process that I am going to discuss is the Mediation 
Program. This program has proven to be very time consuming both for the bank 
and for the borrower. Borrowers who are facing the loss of their primary 
residence through foreclosure are entitled to mediation with the bank in front of 
a court appointed mediator. The borrower is supposed to submit financial 
information prior to the mediation for the bank to review workout options. 
In my experience I have never received this information to review prior. The 
result of this is that the mediation session is not resolved in a single session. 
The borrower is given a list of documents that they must complete and return
prior to mediation session #2 so the bank can review and make options available 
to the borrower. The loan is referred to be scheduled for the next mediation 
session which can be 30 or more days in the future. At this point in timea 
borrower will likely be around 150 to 180 days past due depending on the Court's 
calendar. There are many times that the borrower either doesn't return the 
required documents or returns an incomplete package. As a result, the loan is 
referred for a 3'“ mediation session, again at least 30 days into the future. 
I have one particular loan in foreclosure currently that is headed to a 4*“ 
mediation due to the borrower's failure to appear at his first mediation, followed 
by a failure to complete the hardship package and return the required documents 
by the 2"°‘ and 3'“ mediation sessions. As we are headed to the 4*“ mediation 
session the borrower has indicated he no longer wants to pursue home retention 
and will be listing the property for sale. The original mediation began in early 
November of 2022. We are filing a motion to terminate mediation and be 
returned to the docket to proceed with the foreclosure. This particular case has 
been in limbo due to the Mediation process for 5 months. The borrower is now 
approaching 300 days past due. This is only one case, but l have several more 
similar examples of this process that l could recite that speak to the long process 
that is Foreclosure Mediation in the State of Maine. 
I am in full support that borrowers should be entitled to mediation, however l 
strongly believe that the structure of these sessions needs to be changed to 
reduce the months that the foreclosure process is frozen in time due to these
types of delays. 
As Community Banks, we have often already offered borrowers multiple home 
retention options prior to reaching the commencement of foreclosure and the 
ensuing mediation session. it is always our first desire to achieve home retention 
for a borrower. 
These delays not only are time consuming but financially costly for banks as the 
homes fall into disrepair, become vacant or inhabited by squatters. These delays 
add time and cost to complete the foreclosure. in my 20 years of experience the 
time to complete a foreclosure has increased from 9 - 12 months on average to 
18 - 24 months on average. Borrowers who are not able to make payments are 
typically not able to keep up with maintenance, and the properties fall into 
further disrepair making them difficult to sell at the end of the foreclosure. lt is 
my hope we can work together to develop a more efficient and cost effective 
process for all parties. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
