Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, I am here to support LD 694, An Act to Lower the Signature Quantity 
Requirement for Certain Independent Candidates for Elected Office. I am Patrick Corey 
and live in Windham. 
Requiring unenrolled candidates to collect twice as many signatures to appear ona 
ballot does not serve the people of Maine. Moreover, it is an unnecessary burden in 
demonstrating voter support and treats candidates in an unequal manner. 
Maine’s current law is definitely bipartisan. . .two political parties have worked in 
cooperation to deny unenrolled and unrecognized party candidates the ballot access 
they enjoy. Even a law created in a bipartisan manner can be very partisan when it 
leads to political parties acting in their own self-interest. 
Yes. Collusion has existed over the last century and a half across our nation to protect 
the duopoly, thus framing the way we discuss and frame public policy. In Maine, 
unequal ballot access requirements seek to shut out individuals who’d like to run for 
office with non-conforming viewpoints, are conscientiously averse to a political party’s 
beliefs or leadership, or just reject labels. ln Maine we are free to associate or not, until 
you choose to run for office. Then there is a price to pay for independence. 
Last session, Maine’s Legislature took a huge step in enfranchising our large block of 
unenrolled voters by allowing them to vote in party primaries. This was reasonable 
considering their choices are typically limited to two party candidates in the general 
election. Of course, voting isn’t the only way citizens participate in a democracy, 
elections are the vehicle by which every citizen should have the opportunity to 
participate in government through the selection of their peers. 
Differing requirements based in enrollment to achieve ballot access are anti- 
competitive. Fewer candidates give voters fewer choices. 
I'm going to ask this committee to contemplate the following questions that caused me 
to ask Rep. Riseman to submit this bill. 
Do unequal signature requirements make Maine more or less democratic? 
Does the current law truly help government serve the people of Maine or does it serve 
the political parties whose interest is in perpetuating a two-party system and their 
entrenched brands?
Does the current ballot access law promote equality between candidates? 
I'd like to thank the Rep. Riseman for submitting this bill and the committee in advance 
for your careful consideration. I know that some of my testimony today, due to its focus 
on the fortified two-party system, could raise some eyebrows ’. Honestly, this is nota 
system you created though, only inherited from years upon years of bipartisan self- 
interest. 
Thank you!
