 
 
 
Testimony of Mason Rowell 
in Opposition to LD 1746 
"An Act to Require Responsible Contracting Practices for Public Construction Projects" 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Mason Rowell, and I am the Vice President of Preconstruction 
at Landry / French, also a proud board member of ABC Maine – whom I am testifying on behalf 
of today, in opposition to LD 1746.  
 
If passed and enacted, LD 1746 would wreak havoc on Maine’s construction industry and its 
relationship with the state. In my role as VP of Preconstruction, I work hard every day to 
provide the best value (from a cost, schedule, and quality perspective) to my clients, which 
would almost be impossible if this bill is enacted. Also, this bill would devalue the work 
employers across the state have done in training their workforce, mandate complicated and 
duplicative compliance requirements and most disturbingly, play favorites among the 
workforce by largely benefiting out of state contractors. It’s hard to imagine why this bill is 
necessary or why it is even being submitted at all. 
 
That said, it is important to note that the concepts in this bill are not new. In fact, LD 1746 is a 
nearly exact duplicate of LD 1633 from the 130th Legislature and a version that was tried in the 
129th Legislature – both of which went down in defeat. 
 
Part A of this bill introduces a responsible contractor requirement to be administered by the 
Bureau of General Services (BGS). While ABC Maine agrees that we need responsible 
contractors to complete projects on behalf of the state, we don’t view these requirements as 
responsible or even remotely necessary as BGS and the Maine DOT already have working 
prequalification systems for contractors, which have and continue to serve the State well. ABC 
Maine also questions the cumbersome nature of this new system and the wisdom of qualifying 
a contractor for every project rather than having that information already collected through 
prequalification’s. Adding in that every subcontractor must qualify individually is also a 
departure from standard practice and Prime Contractors certifying subcontractors within 7 days 
of a Notice of Intent to Award is far outside normal procurement practice. 
 
Also, the bill’s apprenticeship requirements are, quite frankly, insulting to many Maine 
employers who have spent money, time, and effort training employees under a myriad of 
programs and training methods and this bill seems to call into question the efficacy of some 
apprenticeships, community college and on-the-job training programs.   
 
Setting Part A aside, Part B of this bill is most offensive as it requires a project labor agreement 
(PLA) on all projects with state funds of over $10 million and as written would encapsulate 
nearly all state projects.  
 
 
PLAs have been documented time and time again to cost more money, complete fewer 
projects, and disqualify more workers than a merit based, open competition bidding process. In 
fact, government mandated PLA’s could cost the state 12-20% more to complete a project, 
which means fewer completed projects at a higher cost to the Maine taxpayer. 
 
We also would note that PLAs discriminate against 90% of Maine’s construction workforce that 
are not affiliated with a union, as very few Mainers who work in construction are members of a 
union. Should the State decide to implement this requirement they will likely have to turn to 
out-of-state companies for workers and at ABC Maine, we are firm believers that Maine 
projects, that are being paid for by Maine tax dollars, should afford Maine people the ability to 
complete the work without being penalized, and this bill and PLAs will make that harder to 
accomplish. 
 
On behalf of ABC Maine and our 182 members we ask that you vote “ought not to pass” on LD 
1746.  
 
Thank you. 
