 
 
 
Testimony of Mitch DeBlois 
President, DeBlois Electric & Immediate Past Chair, ABC Maine 
in Opposition to LD 1746 
"An Act to Require Responsible Contracting Practices for Public Construction Projects" 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Mitch DeBlois. I serve as the immediate past chair of the 
Associated Builders and Contractors of Maine and as President of DeBlois Electric. Today, I am 
testifying on behalf of ABC Maine in opposition to LD 1746. ABC is a national association with 
69 chapters representing more than 21,000 merit shop construction and construction-related 
firms. Here in Maine, ABC represents 182 businesses across the state. 
 
ABC is based on the Merit Shop Philosophy. We help Members develop people, win work, and 
deliver work safely, ethically, and profitably for the betterment of the communities in which we 
work. These are valued principles that DeBlois Electric shares, leading us to join ABC Maine 34 
years ago. DeBlois Electric was started in 1967 and has been serving Maine ever since. In 2020 
we became 100% employee owned and operated and we have an established State of Maine 
registered apprenticeship program since 2019. We know the value of building lasting 
relationships to improve the quality of life for all co-workers, team first.  
 
ABC Maine and our members know the importance of growing the construction trade in Maine 
and the crucial role apprenticeships play in creating good jobs for Mainers. With more 
apprenticeship programs today than we have had in recent years, the construction industry is 
taking responsibility for training and developing its workforce. However, LD 1746 would require 
apprenticeship programs to be in place five years prior to bidding on a project, which will limit 
qualified contractors from bidding on a project.  Five years is unreasonable and will only 
discriminate qualified Maine bidders from bidding.  
 
LD 1746 will require State-mandated PLAs (Project Labor Agreements) on projects over $10 
million which will increase the overall cost of a project an estimated 12% to 20%. The impact of 
being required to sign a PLA forces contractors to join a union, which is detrimental to free 
enterprise. This will cause qualified Maine bidders to choose not to bid on the project. Please 
keep in mind that nearly 90% of the construction workforce in Maine is non-union, so LD 1746 
would lead to much of the large work in Maine going to out-of-state contractors. Furthermore, 
LD 1746 would require any project subcontractor with an estimated amount of $800,000 to sign 
a PLA. As a Maine electrical subcontractor, DeBlois Electric would not bid on the project, nor 
would several other Maine qualified subcontractors. Thus, a very few subcontractors would bid, 
or the work would more than likely be awarded to out-of-state union contractors.   
 
On behalf of ABC Maine and our 182 members we ask that you vote “ought not to pass” on  
LD 1746. Thank you. 
