 
 
May 11, 2023  
 
Testimony of Nina Fisher  
Maine Department of Transportation  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
In Opposition to LD 1746  
An Act to Require Responsible Contracting Practices for Public Construction 
Projects  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Nina Fisher, Deputy Commissioner at MaineDOT.  MaineDOT 
submits the following testimony in opposition to LD 1 746, An Act To Require Responsible 
Contracting Practices for Public Construction Projects.  
 
LD 1 746 sets forth requirements for construction projects that receive state funds and establishes 
a responsible contractor certification process to be administered by the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS). The bill also requires the use of project labor 
agreements on projects that receive state funds of $10 million or more.  The provisions of LD 
1746 are not new proposals.  This bill includes the same provisions that were included in LD 
1633 proposed during the 130th Legislature and many of the same measures included in LD 1639 
introduced during the 129th Legislature. Both of these bills were failed to be enacted.  
 
By way of background, in 2020, in the midst of a worldwide pandemic, MaineDOT opened 618 
bids on 185 projects with a total co nstruction value of $339,190,506. National estimates indicate 
that these contracts provided direct, indirect, and induced jobs for 4,409 people.  Over the course 
of 2021, MaineDOT opened 463 bids on 164 projects with a total construction value of 
$472,211,7 44, providing direct, indirect, and induced jobs for 6,139 people and in 2022, 
MaineDOT opened 440 bids on 151 projects with a total construction value of $397,788,822, 
providing jobs for 5,171 people.  
According to the Associated General Contractors (AGC) of Maine the State of Maine , based on 
2021 data, has  an estimated 4,800 construction firms, most of which are considered small 
businesses with fewer than twenty people.  Approximately 9% of the construction workers are 
unionized.  Because the vast majority  of Maine’s contractors bidding on MaineDOT work are 
ununionized , passage of this bill would drastically reduce the number of bidders on our 
infrastructure projects.  History shows that project bids are likely to increase dramatically with a 
lack of biddin g competition.  
 
 
 
 
 
Contractor Responsibility Certification:  
 
As drafted, LD 1 746 would require that all MaineDOT projects flow through the Bureau of 
General Services within DAFS.   Imposing this requirement upon MaineDOT will significantly 
delay our constructions contracts.  MaineDOT’s contracting process is efficient in that we are 
able to advertise a project, open bids, and file a notice of intent award in a short period of time.  
This is critical due to the short  construction season we experience in Maine.  Most of our 
contractors are ready to begin our project s immediately upon lear ning that  they are the low 
bidder , with  the project commenc ing shortly after the contract in place.  
MaineDOT already has a robust prequalification process for our contractors that addresses the 
requirements outlined within the bill relating to bonding, de faulting on a project, certification of 
not being convicted of a crime, etc.  This prequalification process ensures open -competitive 
bidding as well as  qualified and safety conscious contractors.   Our timely, efficient and thorough 
bid review and award pro cess leads to rational and prudent contracting decisions for the State of 
Maine.      
LD 1 746 requires that a contractor must have participated in a Class A apprenticeship program 
for the three years prior to the date of the bid of the project. The vast maj ority of Maine 
contractors  would not be able to satisfy the Class A Apprenticeship Program thereby making 
them ineligible.   Their inability to bid on our projects would again reduce the competitive 
bidding climate which we are trying to improve to lower co nstruction costs.  
Contract Award; Public Review; Bureau Review  
LD 1 746 proposes to require that a contract be awarded to the best -value bidder.  Many of 
MaineDOT’s projects include both state and federal funding. The Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) requires that federally funded projects use a low -bid system for 
constr uction projects.  This provision of the bill would put us at odds with this federal 
requirement and could jeopardize our more than $ 300 million annually in federal funding.   
LD 1 746’s requirement of public and bureau review will add costly delays to an al ready time 
limited construction season and will further deter interest from bidders resulting in increased 
construction cost due to lack of bids.   
Project Labor Agreements  
While this provision of LD 1 746 only applies to projects over $10,000,000, MaineDOT  still has 
many projects of this size within our Three -Year Workplan.   These projects are currently 
performed by qualified Maine companies that would not meet this project labor agreement 
requirement.   The success of these companies is dependent on the abi lity to bid and perform the 
type of work that MaineDOT advertises.   This requirement within LD 1 746 would limit their 
ability to do so and limit the number of contractors able to bid MaineDOT work.   
In an effort to entice more contractors to bid our work,  MaineDOT has made significant efforts 
over the past few years to make contracting more streamlined .  Competition results in lower 
 
 
 
construction costs and a better value for the  Maine  taxpayer.   Passage of this bill would 
negatively impact this effort.   The end result will be that MaineDOT will pay more for 
construction projects  and less projects will be completed.  
It is for these reasons that we request that the committee vote ought not to pass on LD 1 746.   
 
