 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent  
University of Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
DATE:   May 11, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Labor and Housing  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations  
RE:   LD 1746, An Act to Require Responsible Contracting Practices for Public  
  Construction Projects  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing: I am writing today on behalf of the University of Maine S ystem  
to inform the Committee’s consideration of  LD 1746, An Act to Require Responsible Contracting 
Practices for Public Construction Projects.  
UMS has held tuition flat eight of the past 12 years and during that same period, our annual 
appropriation has actually declined when adjusted for inflation . Meanwhile, our operating 
costs have continued to climb , largely driven by collectively bargained c ompensation, which 
comprises more than two -thirds of our budget.  
To ensure we can  continue  our nation -leading college affordability, sustain our public universities 
where they and meet our obligations to our world -class faculty and staff, UMS  is concern ed 
about  any legislation that could  further increase our costs , like LD 1746 .  
Our public universities’ serious need for infrastructure investment is well known. More than half 
of UMS facilities and three -quarters of our residence halls have not been meaningfully 
renovated in at least 50 years . According to an independent analysis , our public universities 
are burdened by a backlog of deferred maintenance and imminent need that  now 
exceeds $1.6 billion, more than four times the combined need of Mai ne’s community 
college system and maritime academy .  
 
We encourage your support of additional State infrastructure investment in UMS, like the $100 
million bond proposed by LD 460, which has bipartisan sponsorship  and was further endorsed 
by the Education & Cu ltural Affairs Committee in their recent budget report -back  to your 
colleagues on the Appropriations  & Financial Affairs  Committee . This funding would  enable 
our universities to better sustain and increase program enrollment, improve student 
success, meet the needs of Maine e mployers for more skilled workers and research -
driven innovation, and benefit local communities .  
 
New mandates  that would increase capital project costs and time lines directly  challen ge our 
ability to serve our students and our state . For example, this summer, the University of Southern 
Maine will also open a new 580 -bed residence hall and Career & Student Success Center , which 
sustained good -paying Maine construction jobs during the pandemic . The project will transform 
USM’s Portland campus, the community and students’ readiness for the Maine workforce — 
providing much needed affordable housing that will make it easier for our students to stay in 
school to degree completion while incurring less  debt and alleviating demand on local units . The 
process outlined in LD 1746 would have undoubtedly  delayed this mission -critical project 
and its public benefit.  Furthermore, while the 100% employee -owned general contractor, PC 
Construction, utilized seve ral union subcontractors, including KONE for elevator work and the 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 Maine -based ES Boulos for electrical,  it is unlikely they would have been able to bid had the Part 
B provisions requiring project  labor agreements already been law.   
If this bill moves forward, we want to make the Committee aware that while we are governed by 
some of the  same sections of contracting -related statute, the Bureau of General Services is 
not typically involved in UMS contracting solicitations and decision -making, including for 
capital projects supported by State funding . We are unsure how Part A of LD 1 746 would 
apply to our System  and how it may conflict with the authority  of our legislatively confirmed Board 
of Trustees.  
We would  also encourage the Committee to consider raising the $10 million threshold that 
constitutes a “large project” in Part B,  given market changes caused by inflation and materials 
and labor costs. The System’s insurance company considers a large project to be $50 million or 
higher. Since 2020, UMS has undertaken, or has received preliminary Trustee approval for,10 
projects above $10 million, four of which were above $60 million.  
Thank you for your support of Maine’s public universities, including critical capital investments 
that position our institutions to best serve our students and the state  into the future . Please let me 
know any  additional information I can provide on behalf of UMS  before your work session.   
 
 
 
