   
3025 North Belfast Avenue  •   PO Box 27 • Augusta, ME 04332 -0027  •  207 -621-8505   
www.gannestonconstruction.com  
 
Letter of Opposition to LD 1746  
An Act to Require Responsible Contracting Practices  
for Public Construction Projects 
May 4 , 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Stacey Morrison,  and I am the CEO and  
Owner of Ganneston Construction Corp.  I urge you to oppose LD  1746.  
  
Ganneston Construction is an Augusta, Maine based company offering co nstruction 
services for the renovation and new construction of buildings throughout Maine and a Prequalified Contractor for building projects  through Maine DOT. Since acquiring 
this business over twenty -two years ago we have successfully renovated and buil t 
new courthouses, schools, labs, and other  State funded  buildings  ranging i n size up to 
$12 Million while carrying a workload of $26 Million.  We are currently  working on 
the Cross Building Envelope Improvement project. Our current bonding program is $20 Million for a single project and $40 Million aggregate.  
 The proposed  new certification requirement is unnecessary and will only duplicate 
efforts , delay awards and  increase government costs.  The Bureau of General Services 
and Maine DOT already have a Contractor Prequalification in place that addresses qualifications, resources, capabilities, terminations, suspension, defaults, denial of award s, debarment, claims, b id or other crimes, quality control, key personnel 
licenses/certifications, bonding capabilities, safety, environmental , civil rights  and a 
renewal process.  Additionally, some of the nuances of the proposed certification requirement are erroneous and ques tionable for compliance .  Why would the State 
require  a new certification requirement for every bid/project award when it already 
exists  through the State’s Contractor Prequalification?  It doesn't make sense!   
 Requiring subcontractor s to abide by this cer tification is concerning.  Contractors are 
considered “Prime Contractors” and are responsible for complying  with  the project 
contract.  They already have an internal prequalification process they utilize for 
subcontractors.  Forcing subcontractor s to meet thes e new certification requirements 
could severely limit the number of subcontractors willing to bid on S tate projects.  
 
Requiring contractors and subcontractors to participate in an apprenticeship 
program 5 years prior to bidding is disconcerting. Is the State no longer recognizing 
on the job training, certifications through Maine Department of Labor programs or  
our Maine Community College System?  In the last two years, G anneston Construction 
participated in an apprenticeship program for laborers and will co ntinue to utilize 
   
3025 North Belfast Avenue  •   PO Box 27 • Augusta, ME 04332 -0027  •  207- 621-8505   
www.gannestonconstruction.com  
these programs for laborers and carpenters as they are available.  However, they are 
not the only form of training that should be recognized by the State!  
 
State mandated PLAs  on State projects over $10 Million increase the cost of doing 
business in Maine, by limiting non- union bidders, project costs could increase by as 
much as 12% to 20% when compared to similar projects not subject to government-
mandated PLAs. This is yet another burden to Maine developers, companies and 
taxpayers. Stat e projects already require prevailing wage rates , so all workers are 
being paid  mandated wage s and benefits .   
 
Requiring Maine contractors and subcontractors who decide not to join a union to 
sign a PLA is unfair. Nearly 90 percent of Maine contractors choose not to join a labor 
union, including myself.  At Ganneston, we offer market rate salaries, health, dental, vision, disability, accident, life and cancer insurances, a 401k plan with a 4% match and generous vacation time.  Most all contractors and subcontractors offer these wages and benefits to attract skilled employees.  
 All Maine contractors and workers should have the right to make decisions for 
themselves, and not force any of them into a project labor agreement that they choose not to enter into  in the first place.  
 The State of Maine has always encouraged open competition and a free- market 
approach that awards contracts  to the lowest cost responsible bidder based solely on 
merit, regardless of labor affiliation.  Why would the State change this now, when 
90% of the construction industry is non- union? It will only eliminate competition 
from  Maine Contractors!   
 
A final thought, are Maine’s non- union prequalified contractors that built buildings of 
all sizes over the last 20 years no longer qualified?  
 If you have any questions, please reach out to me at my office (207) 621 -8505 or on 
my cell (207) 841 -7799.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
  
Stacey L. Morrison 
CEO and Owner  
  

