 
TESTIMONY OF TIMOTHY OUELLETTE 
 IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1746  
 
An Act to Require Responsible Contracting Practices for Public 
Construction Projects 
 
Committee On Labor and Housing 
 
Thursday, May 11 
 
Good morning Senator Tipping, Rep resentative Roader and disting uished members of 
the Committee on Labor and Housin g. My name is Tim Ouellette, I  live in 
Scarborough, and I am one of the owners of CPM Constructors, a bridge and heavy 
construction company based in Freeport. We employ over 100 skil led people across 
Maine, and provide them with g reat benefits and training. I hav e previously served as 
Board President for AGC Maine, a n association representing over  250 construction 
firms and thousands of construc tion workers across the state. I  am submitting my 
testimony in opposition to LD 1746  An Act To Require Responsibl e Contracting 
Practices for Public Construction Projects. 
 This proposed legislation is writ ten to address a problem that does not exist in Maine. 
If passed, LD 1746 will create conf usion, lock out 95% of Maine  contractors from 
doing business on large projects, and subject most contractors to de-certification based 
on minor infractions. Maine cont ractors across the board are co mpeting like everyone 
else to attract people to our i ndustry. We already provide a wi de range of benefits, 
excellent pay, and strong safety p rograms to ensure people enjo y working with us and 
conduct our work safely.  
Also, those of us who work for M aine Department of Transportati on or Maine 
Turnpike Authority already go th rough a rigorous prequalificati on process. That is 
after going through the usual banking and bonding approvals tha t are the basic 
requirement of any contractor, e specially one working on public  projects. 
 Some other points of the proposed legislation:  
 
 The apprenticeship process is not defined well and does not rec ognize all the 
robust training already taking place in the industry;  
 The $1,000 penalty threshold for pr evious violations is extreme ly low at a time 
when federal and state agencies c harge fines for minor correcte d issues, not to 
mention motor vehicle incidents;  
 The prime contractor certificat ion exposes the contractor to li ability outside its 
control;  
 The public review and bureau rev iew periods slow the whole cons truction 
process down when contractors n eed to lock in purchase orders a nd 
subcontracts due to inflation and tight workforce schedules.  
 
Finally, the Project Labor Agreem ent (PLA) requirement favors s ignatory (labor 
union) contractors, which make up on only 5% of all companies i n the state. This 
proposal locks out 95% of the c onstruction companies in Maine f rom doing business 
with the state, while doing nothing new to guarantee the qualit y, safety and 
completion of projects over $10 million. Public projects over $ 10 million are being 
built now across Maine, and they  are all being built profession ally, safely and by 
skilled Maine workers hoping to c ontinue working in the state.  
  I encourage you to vote against th is proposed legislation. Than k you for your time. 
 
  
 
 
