1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
March 8, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 751 An Act to Clarify the Powers of a Conservator to 
Transfer Property before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Veterans and Legal Affairs
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
pain 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs are at stake. Our 
clients are all age sixty or older, most have very low incomes and some are 
the most physically and financially compromised adults in our State. Many 
of them live in their own homes and have children or other family members 
who help them with the usual needs of daily living. They want to remain as 
independent as possible and they are firm in their desire to live their home 
until they die.     
One of the most disappointing and difficult situations confronting these 
older adults occurs when they deed a whole or partial interest in their home 
to a family member only to see their right to live in the home threatened. 
This typically happens because the older adult has become the victim of 
financial exploitation and is facing eviction by someone they trusted. While 
Maine law provides specific help in these matters and we are often able to 
have the transfer reversed, it is not a simple matter to win these cases. That 
is why we were in support of legislation four years ago that created Transfer 
on Death (TOD) deeds.      
A TOD deed allows a person to deed their home to a beneficiary but the 
legal ownership interest does not pass to the beneficiary until the person 
dies. Without a present interest in a home, nobody has the legal right to evict 
a person from their home or sell it without their consent. This form of deed 
2also removes a worry about the effect that irresponsible money decisions, 
traffic accidents or family law problems might have on a person’s right to 
live in their home if they transfer an interest to their child or anyone else. 
Without a present interest there is nothing to attach or lien.   
A transfer on death deed can be revoked at any time during a person’s 
lifetime by filing a revocation in the registry of deeds. For a financially 
exploited adult that’s an easier option than a lawsuit to get their property 
back if their trust has been betrayed. For those concerned that passing a 
home to a member of a family through their will might entail more effort for 
the survivor than they should bear, a transfer on death deed avoids the 
probate process entirely since the property passes automatically by operation 
of law at death. It also retains the tax advantages of a probate transfer by 
allowing the grantee to receive a stepped-up basis in the property calculated 
on the day of death.       
Any adult who has the mental capacity may transfer their home using a TOD 
deed. However, if they have lost capacity to manage their financial affairs 
and the Probate Court has appointed a conservator to act in their behalf 
whether the TOD deed is available to the conservator is not clear. Hence the 
need for this legislation.   
This bill amends Title 18-C §5-414 (Powers of conservator requiring court 
approval). Subsection 1(B) describes the authority of a conservator to sell or 
encumber an interest in a home owned by the person they are responsible for 
as follows: 
“1.  Powers requiring specific authorization; notice.
Except as otherwise ordered by the court, a conservator must give notice to 
persons entitled to notice under section 5-403, subsection 4 and receive 
specific authorization by the court before the conservator may exercise with 
respect to the conservatorship the power to: …
 B. Sell, encumber an interest in or surrender a lease to the primary dwelling 
of the individual subject to conservatorship;” 
This section does not mention a TOD deed and the authority to sell or 
encumber does not apply to a TOD deed. In fact, using a TOD deed to sell or 
encumber property is prohibited by sections 6-405 and 6-412(1) of The 
Uniform Real Property Transfer-on-Death Act (Title 18-C Article 6 Part 4).    
3Title 18-C §6-405 says: “An individual may transfer for no consideration 
property to one or more beneficiaries effective at the transferor's death by a 
transfer on death deed”. Title 18-C §6-412(1) says: “During a transferor's 
life, a transfer on death deed does not: 1. Affect an interest or right of the 
transferor or any other owner, including the right to transfer or encumber the 
property”.  
Adding the authority to sign a TOD deed to the powers of a conservator 
appears necessary. Requiring both notice to legally entitled parties and court 
approval is also a prudent step. It confirms the conservator’s authority and 
helps ensure that any risk of harm is identified before it occurs. The 
monitoring of a conservator’s performance is an after-the-fact exercise and 
discovering self-dealing or another equally egregious breach of a 
conservator’s fiduciary duty is more difficult after it occurs. 
We have an additional observation to make before concluding our remarks. 
In reading the bill and the existing law, we discovered another related issue. 
We realized that in addition to the absence of a conservator’s authority to 
sign a TOD deed, the current Probate Code also lacks specific authority for a 
conservator to revoke a TOD deed already filed in the Registry of Deeds. 
We respectfully suggest that there should be no doubt about the 
conservator’s power to revoke an existing TOD deed with court approval 
and proper notice to interested parties. We believe that this power will not be 
exercised frequently but, especially in cases involving financial exploitation, 
it will allow a conservator to easily undo a prior TOD deed benefiting 
someone who has exploited a dependent adult.  
A “friendly amendment” could clarify the authority to revoke by the adding 
the words “or revoke” to the bill’s proposed language so that it would read: 
B.  Sell, encumber, convey or release an interest in, sign or revoke a transfer 
on death deed for or surrender a lease to the primary dwelling of the 
individual subject to conservatorship. For purposes of this paragraph, 
"transfer on death deed" has the same meaning as in section 6-402, 
subsection 6; 
   .  
Thank you for letting me share our thoughts with you today and we hope 
that you will vote ought to pass.    
