Jared Bornstein 
Representing Aroma Joes 
Supporting LD 1831 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the 
Labor and Housing Committee. I would like to thank the department for their willingness to 
engage in important dialogue around these issues, it is very much appreciated. I am here today 
representing a regional company with franchise locations in New Hampshire and Maine, Aroma 
Joes. You may have stopped at one before, maybe even today for your morning coffee. Aroma 
Joe's prides itself on the quality of the coffee and food at an affordable price, as well as beinga 
great place for Mainers of all ages to work. Some of the best people we hire are in their late 
teens. They are reliable hard workers who we can depend on to deliver our great products 
while cutting down on how long our customers are waiting in line. One of our challenges with 
employing these workers is that we are somewhat unclear on what equipment they may use or 
may not use. You see, we want to follow the law to a T with no deviation. Sometimes, however, 
the law is not very clear. We are hoping that the department can adjust their messaging around 
prohibited activities for minors, and affirmatively state what they are allowed to do. For 
example, on the Department of Labor's website 
(https:[/www.maine.gov/labor/labor laws/minorsguide/) it says that "cooking" is prohibited, 
except for at ”soda fountains, lunch counters, snack bars, or cafeteria serving counters ” later on 
it prohibits minors using "power driven (...) grinders." l do not even know what a ”soda 
fountain" is, or why someone would be cooking at it. I also do not believe that ”lunch counters, 
snack bars or cafeteria serving counters" are clearly understood by the average person trying to 
research the law so they can follow it. What does a snack bar constitute? What does a soda 
fountain constitute? Not to mention, what kind of grinder are they prohibited from using?A 
food grinder like a blender, or a coffee bean grinder? When l asked the department, they said 
coffee bean grinders were fine. But they do not look fine based on the website. They agreed 
that normal coffee shop and country store equipment was currently legal, so we are just asking 
that the department use those normal names for businesses rather than soda fountains and 
lunch counters. 
In addition, we are asking that for the purposes of continuity, principals and guidance 
counsellors are all authorized to sign work permits, rather than the current practice of 
superintendents delegating that role to whomever. We would not take away their ability to 
delegate to additional school staff, but as a baseline we believe that it is reasonable and 
promotes a more efficient work permit process if the staff members who can sign work permits 
is standardized across school districts. 
We also would like the department to review the violation fine structure statute and see 
if there are any changes that could be made to update the statute and ensure that businesses 
are clear on what the penalties are for breaking the law. Lastly, we ask that the department 
take an affirming position on some basic best practices when employing minors. We hope that 
they can work with upstanding businesses to create some best practice systems that new 
employers, or new to employing minors, can use in order to prevent any potential law 
violations. Thank you for letting me testify, l welcome any questions.
