Aroma Joe? 
Maryna Shuliakouskaya 
Support 1831 
Good Afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee. My name is Maryna Shuliakouskaya, and I am the COO of Acadia Management Group in 
Maine, as well as a Franchisee of 8 Aroma Joe's stores. You may hear my accent as I am originally from 
Belarus. I came here 16 years ago as a J 1 student visa worker. I have since earned degrees in International 
Business. I also just graduated with a doctorate in International Business and Marketing. I have been 
working in some way for Aroma Joe's for I I years. The brand has provided me with a rewarding and 
fulﬁlling career. 
One of the things I most enjoy is seeing the development of my employees. In some cases, I meet 
them when they are high school students and see them progress all the way to management. Or, they go to 
college and return to work during the summers and breaks. It is a gift to be able to see these hardworking 
young people grow and develop skills and abilities that will help them for life, and I am grateful to bea 
part of that. I look forward to continuing this aspect of my career for many years to come. It is not without 
challenges. Employing high schoolers comes with additional tasks and management tactics in order to 
comply with the law, which is always our goal. For example, we schedule our minor employees fewer 
hours to ensure they do not exceed the allowable amount. In addition, we have put more strict standards in 
place than the state requires to ensure that our employees and the law are respected. In our internal policy, 
we have a three-strike system in place for employees or managers who violate the law. This ensures that 
we have a culture of adherence and that our employees and store managers know that we are serious 
about compliance. 
Though we have additional wants in terms of changes to current regulations, we understand that 
recently there has been a slew of flagrant violations of child labor policies, and the department is ﬁndinga 
balance with how to address the bad actors while supporting those businesses who are trying their best to 
do the right thing. This bill is a very solid start at giving clarity about some hazardous tasks related to our 
business, as well as other small businesses, it allows those school staff with the most interaction with the 
children to be the ones to sign off on work permits, and it gives upstart businesses and longstanding 
businesses some guidelines for employing minors. Though we would like to see a more graduated scale 
for fines for violations, we understand that the department often negotiates down on ﬁnes and needs 
ﬂexibility in the statute to do so. I appreciate you all hearing my testimony and look forward to any 
%;¢»¢ S@.&‘ ¢,é.=»~¢¢é7;~ questions you may have.
