.151; STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
_ 
“{__L-‘;._§§§.i 54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Janet T_ Mms Laura A. Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Michael Roland, 
Bureau of Labor Standards, Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For nor Against LD 1831, 
Resolve, Relating to the Employment of Minors 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing Public Hearing, 
Tuesday, May 9, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I am Michael Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards for 
the Maine Department of Labor (Department). l am here today to speak on behalf of the Department 
neither for nor against LD 1831, Resolve, Relating to the Employment of Minors. 
First, we would like to acknowledge the willingness of the sponsor and others to discuss the original 
proposed language and intent of this bill, and to amend it in favor the current resolve. Next, regarding 
the particular components of the resolve: 
1. We believe the existing penalty structure should remain as is. lt provides us with an 
effective tool for achieving compliance while allowing the flexibility to work with employers 
who demonstrate good faith once their responsibilities under the law are made clear. That 
said, if so instructed by the Legislature we will review the penalty structure in statute and 
rule for clarity and effectiveness, and report our findings and any recommendations to the 
Committee. 
2. We doubt we have the authority, and in any case we would be reluctant, to promulgate 
rules regarding the managerial activities of school superintendents within their 
administrative units. However, we would be pleased to work with the Department of 
Education to ensure that superintendents are aware of their ability to designate others 
including principals and guidance counselors as authorized agents to sign work permits. 
3. We will be happy, with or without a resolve, to enhance our website with materials 
dedicated to providing greater clarity on the employment of minors in the operation of 
equipment typically found in country stores and coffee shops. 
4. Similarly, we'll gladly describe best practices and otherwise update as necessary the already 
extensive documents regarding employment of minors found on our website, including our 
HEITIPIOYBFS Guide TO YOUth Employment" (https:/jwww.maine.gov/labor/labor laws/minorsguide[). 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287~5Z92 
The Maine Department of Labor proiides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon iequest to iridi\iduals \\l[l‘l disabilities.
As with all of our efforts to implement Maine's employment statutes, our goal is compliance and our 
preferred method is education. For this reason, we are delighted with any opportunity to provide 
greater clarity to employers and the entire regulated community. 
Thanks for your time and attention, and l'd be happy to answer any questions you might have. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sen/ing Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth.
