Alexi Potter
Orono
LD 469
Dear members of the Health and Human Services Committee, my name is Alexi 
Potter and I go to Orono Middle School. I am testifying in support of LD 469, An Act
to Provide Funding for a Diabetes Education Program.
At seven years old, all you want to think about is what color shirt you’re wearing 
tomorrow, or which ice cream flavor you want Mom to bring home later. But when I 
was seven years old, I was forced to think about how much insulin to inject into my 
body and how to know the difference between high and low blood sugar.
The reason I am able to live a happy and normal life with type 1 diabetes is because 
of the education I received when I was first diagnosed.
When I was brought into the hospital, my blood glucose level was over 500, which is 
very dangerous. Hearing this news brought pure panic and anger because I thought I 
was dying. 
But what I was taught by the diabetes educators during my stay at the hospital, was 
that there are kids like me all across the globe who thrive and live normal lives with 
T1D. However, I also learned some don’t have access to the medicine they need to 
live or aren’t able to get the right education, so they can’t learn what is happening to 
them. 
I didn’t realize it then, but I now know how fortunate I was to get free education that 
helped me understand I was not alone.
With education, support, and the right resources, diabetics are better able to manage 
their disease and be their own advocates. Research also shows people with diabetes 
education are more likely to take their prescribed medications and be more aware of 
their blood sugar levels. Diabetics need the knowledge, skills, and tools to succeed, 
and they can only get these through the proper education. It is not enough to get 
information from a pamphlet and call it okay. We require instruction from 
professionals that are tailored to our specific needs because every diabetic is different.
Even people who have had diabetes for 20 years need education because technology 
is always changing and getting better.
LD 469 will help solve these problems for type 1 and type 2 diabetics and give us more 
opportunities and resources to be the best we can be.
Diabetics already have enough to worry about. It shouldn’t be a challenge to get the proper 
education.
Thank you for your time and consideration.

