March 22, 2023  
My name is Karen Wint on and I am submit ting this t estimo ny in favor of LD469  - An Act to 
Provide Funding for a Diabetes Education Program .  
I am a Mom to a Type 1 diabetic. My son  Jack was diagnosed  in April of 2019, at age 14. On the 
day of his diagnosis, we traveled from our home in Kennebunk, to his pediatrician in York, and 
were  referred immediate ly to Maine Medical Center in Portland. We arrived late in the evening, 
where my son was admitted to the Barbara Bush Children ’s Hospital wing . There we met Dr. 
Michael Dedekian, who had stayed late, after his shift , to me et us and let us know what my son 
and our family would be facing for the rest of his life.  
When you are new to Type 1 diabetes, you need to learn a new way of life. To give you an idea 
of this new way of life, I’d like to ask each of you to calculate how much insulin  your pancreas  
would produ ce when eat a banana?   
How many carbohydrates are in a banana anyway? (About 27 grams in a medium sized banana.)  
Depending  on factors like how  much time it will take  you to digest the banana, you would have 
an “insulin to carbohydrate ratio” that would help you determine  exactly how much insulin to 
give yourself, to “cover ” for this banana , but you would also have to consider  if you have any 
insulin in your system from a previous snack or meal, if you plan to be active in any way after 
you eat the banana,  and if you are stressed,  tired, or sick while you are eating the banana.  
My son had to learn to inject himself with insulin, monitor his blood glucose levels and even test 
his blood or urine  for ketones. If any of t hese terms sound foreign to you - welcome to our world. 
Without the doctors, nurses, and care staff that were available to us at diagnosis, and after, m y 
son would not be here today.  
My so n is now 18, and as a M om, in ge neral, I worry about his future. But, as a Mom to a Type 1 
diabetic, I specifically  worry about  his future with respect to  the access to quality care  to 
manage his chronic illness.  Any barrier  to care , including distance to travel for care , that we 
have the opportunity  to remove , will have a significant impact on my son , and on his future , as 
well as all others living with diabetes.  
Individuals living with T ype 1 diabetes make HUNDREDS of health -related decisions each  day. 
They make these decisions whether they have had a good night ’s sleep or not, whether they have 
a project due, or a mid -term to study for, a baseball game, or a death in the family. In short, they 
need help.  
People with Type 1 diabetes have no choice but to live this way. They require outside 
intervention to stay alive.  They have t o learn to manage th is illness , and in best case scenarios, 
involve their family, friends and caregivers in this learning.  Having low blood sugar or high 
blood sugar can lead to life -threatening complications. And diab etics can have both in one day , 
in the span of hours at times. This is a disease largely self - managed, and education, training  and 
on-going support is essential.   
In add ition to being Jack ’s Mom, I work for the Town of Kennebunk and manage Social 
Services  for the Town. I have personally worked with many individuals in town, who are 
members of vulnerable populations , and experience c halle nges accessing medical care, in cluding 
that for diabetes. We have resources to get people to the doctor, locally. Getting them to the 
doctor in Portland  or Portsmouth is more of a challenge. Diabetics live with plenty of challenges, 
but accessing quality care and education should not be one of them.  
I urge you to support an y incentive or support t hat would  increase access to this vital and critical 
service.  
 
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
Karen Winton  
1 Glengary Place  
Kennebunk, ME 04043  
