TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND 
FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. 305 
“An Act to Provide Youth Lifetime Hunting Licenses to Eligible Dependents of Veterans 
Who Are 100 Percent Disabled ” 
Sponsored By: Representative HYMES of Waldo. 
Cosponsored By: Representative WOOD of Greene 
Representative NEWMAN of Belgrade 
Representative THORNE of Carmel 
DATE OF HEARING: February 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for nor against L.D. 305. 
This bill proposes to allow each eligible dependent of a veteran who is 100% disabled to receive 
one complimentary youth lifetime hunting license. 
The Department would like to point out a few areas where it feels that clariﬁcation of the law 
should be considered. First, there is no standard deﬁnition of “dependent ” in Title 12 so it would 
be good to deﬁne that in this section of law. Second, the proposed law does not specify that this 
would be for Maine residents only. We are not sure if that was intentional or not. In addition, we 
have been in contact with Veteran Services on this bill. They recommend that the term “100% 
disabled ” be changed to “l00% Permanent and Total”. 
We would also point out that the number of licenses sold by the department is factored into the 
funding that the department receives from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The licenses being 
discussed within this bill would be considered complimentary which means that they cannot be 
counted as a license “sold” , therefore reducing the number of licensed hunters and reducing the 
depa1tment ’s eligibility for federal funding. This would also have a direct ﬁnancial impact to the 
department with the loss of license revenue, requiring a fairly substantial ﬁscal note be attached 
to the bill so if the Committee decides to move forward with this legislation, the Ofﬁce of Fiscal 
Policy and Program Review will be asked to provide that ﬁscal note.
We certainly appreciate the dedication and service that our veterans have given. Current ﬁsh and 
wildlife law offers numerous licensing opportunities that support our veterans. In this proposal 
we want the committee to fully consider both the pros as well as the cons of this possible 
opportunity for dependents of 100% permanent and total disabled veterans. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the Work session.
