l\/laineHealth 
Testimony of Danielle Loring, LCSW 
In Strong Support of LD 181, 
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Implement Secure Children's Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility 
Services" 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services, my name is Danielle Loring and I serve as the Director of 
Intensive Services with the Maine Behavioral Healthcare Emergency Department Crisis 
Program. Over the past 20 years, I have been employed and trained in a variety of 
clinical healthcare settings across New York City, Rhode Island and Maine, including: 
community-based behavioral healthcare service lines, inpatient hospitals and 
emergency departments, and, very importantly, secure behavioral healthcare settings 
such as those that are the subject of this legislation. Since graduating from Columbia 
University with a Master's Degree in Social Work, Advanced Clinical Practice, I have 
spent my career striving to improve care and clinical outcomes for youth facing 
behavioral health challenges. 
Over the better part of the past 12 years, I have had the privilege of providing patient 
care and leading a crisis program dedicated to intervention with our most vulnerable 
youth experiencing crises within seven emergency rooms across the State of Maine. In 
this role, I see firsthand the significant gaps that exist in Maine's behavioral health 
system. These gaps result in youth being forced to spend prolonged periods of time in 
the most highly restrictive setting — our hospital emergency departments. 
Youth with very high needs are exhausting emergency room resources, being displaced 
from their homes, care teams, schooling and all forms of social interaction. Their 
families, residential programs, schools and providers often divert these patients to the 
emergency department to address their needs in a "safer" physical environment than is 
available within the community. In an effort to protect these youth from harming
1 
110 Free Street ' Portland, ME 04101 Phone: 207-661-7001 Fax: 207-661-7029 mamehealth org
themselves or others, they are too frequently contained in the most highly restrictive 
and counter-therapeutic option we have available within our behavioral health system— 
emergency departments. 
What results from these emergency department interventions are youth in containment 
for days to weeks to months at a time, confined to a hospital bed in a windowless room, 
with no sunlight, education, fresh air, healthy diversity of meals, nor access to care, 
family, peers or physical exertion — all of which are necessary for any child's 
development and emotional stability. 
The lack of treatment resources available within an emergency care triage facility that is 
intended to stabilize and transfer patients to more appropriate locations for specialized 
care, results in children being exposed to interventions they would likely not require in 
an appropriate care setting. The absence of qualified, certified trained clinical staff in 
child development and pediatric care in an emergency department poses a significant 
risk to this most fragile population of children and adolescents struggling with 
behavioral health issues. Additionally, prolonged containment often results in 
inadvertent exposure to highly acute medical and psychiatric emergencies inadvertently 
placing them at risk of traumatization or re-traumatization. 
Who are these children? They are the 12-year-old child who has spent five of the last 
nine months living in hospital emergency departments. During their most recently 
prolonged stay, which was two months and spanned Christmas, they were exposed to 
the death of another 4-year-old medical patient, a highly traumatizing event for a young 
person already severely traumatized in their life. 
Another example involves three adolescent patients all of whom awaited placement for 
over one-week in the same ED — and all of which are high utilizers of emergency room 
services over the course of 2022-2023 due to significant safety concerns in the home 
and repeated denials from in-state residential facilities. These young people were
exposed to a traumatic event where the door to one of their rooms was kicked in by an 
adult psychiatric patient experiencing an acute psychotic episode. 
Yet another 13-year-old patient presenting to a rural emergency room six times over 
the course of three months, then was hospitalized on an inpatient unit only to return 
immediately back to the ED where they remained for over one month. This patient 
caused significant damage to ED property and injuries to nurses, which escalated 
throughout their stay due to adverse response to being contained in an inappropriate 
level of care. The profound implications of these experiences on our complex youth is 
truly under-represented and underestimated as evidenced by our system's limited 
response to intervene with safe placement options. 
So what is the answer? While our youth need access to a full continuum of services at all 
levels, one gaping hole in our current system is secure residential treatment. 
Through my clinical experience in Rhode Island, I have had the honor of engaging in care 
with children in a secure residential setting. This was in fact some of the most 
rewarding, most meaningful work I have ever been a part of. The youth being served in 
these settings are happy, engaged, active members of society and invested in their 
learning and treatment. They develop positive attachments with staff, some of which 
they might have never developed otherwise, spend a significant portion of their 
treatment and programming outdoors under the sunlight. They learn to thrive in peer 
relationships, overcome challenges, develop effective coping skills and to connect ina 
family-style setting eating meals together as a team. The consistency of staff, clinical 
competency of clinicians, structure of the milieu, routines, clear expectations, access to 
developmentally appropriate activities, trauma-informed care, comprehensive 
education, supportive clinical intervention and proactive de-escalation through CPI 
(Crisis Prevention Institute) certified providers, resulted in a placement of engaged, 
uplifted children focused on overcoming barriers and improving their wellness. 
Although this setting was secure, the locked nature of the facility was not a noticeable 
feature nor a focal point to the children it served. Family visits were encouraged in
homey rooms equipped with comfortable couches and games, and children were 
provided the parameters in which to connect, improve upon these relationships and to 
succeed. Young people were able to move seamlessly between the secure setting and 
their homes as part of their treatment plans. Parents were most often willing to 
facilitate discharge planning discussions with the care team knowing this resource 
would be accessible again if indicated after the child returned home. Children 
demonstrated improvements in their overall symptom and safety profiles, did not 
require frequent restraints, although a secure safety room was available if and when 
they needed space to regroup and de-escalate. The amount of time spent outdoors 
engaging in fresh air afforded them the respect and independence they deserved and 
were often seeking. Many of these children went on to thrive in other environments and 
were greatly impacted by their stay due to the highly influential treatment teams they 
interfaced with on a daily basis. In fact, some of my most impactful clinical interventions 
occurred within the confines of this PRTF setting. 
ln conclusion, the emergency room is a necessary and critically important component 
within our system of care in treating acute medical and psychiatric emergencies. 
However, once those presentations have been stabilized, further containment in this 
location is detrimental to any patient, especially our struggling youth. Expediting 
transfer to a more secure location where youth are able to thrive and receive the care 
they are so desperately needing in a safe, secure location, will allow them the 
opportunity to persevere, overcome and succeed in our state. Too often, our system 
focuses on patient rights all while denying the fact that over-applying our perspective 
may inadvertently cause harm to the most vulnerable populations we are all here to 
support. I truly believe youth outcomes will exponentially improve with the addition of 
PRTF options within Maine. 
I strongly encourage you to support this legislation and ensure that the Department 
moves quickly to develop this important treatment option.
