leanne M. Lamhrew, Ph.D. 
C onrmissioner Lmei '|~ 
_ Ming _ Maine l)epartment of Health and Human Set \ iL£S 
Commissione ﬂs Ottrrt Governor L -/3» 
.9 
ﬂint ll State House St rtron 
t I09 Capitol ‘st! eat 
Arwrrsta, rvmmt- 04333-om: '* 
C 
Tel: (207) Z87-3707; Fax: (Z07) Z8’/'='§t)0S 
TTY: Dial '7l l (l\'laine Rd i\) 
Testimony of the Office of Children and Family Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee 011 Health and Human Services 
In Opposition to LD 181 Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Implement Secure Children ’s Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility 
Presented by: Senator Black 
Hearing Date: March 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, my name is Dean Bugaj. I am the Associate Director of Children ’s 
Behavioral Health with the Ofﬁce of Child and Family Services. I am here today to speak to the 
Department ’s opposition to LD 181, Resolve Directing the Department of Health and Human 
Services to Implement Secure Children ’s Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility (PRTF). 
The Office of MaineCare Services and the Office of Child and Family Services share the priority 
of developing a PRTF in Maine and have been working collaboratively toward this goal since 
expanding coverage to include this service in 2018. Through this work, the beginning of which 
included extensive planning with an interested provider, the Offices determined that the current 
design of the PRTF in MaineCare policy was not feasible to support establishment of a facility in 
Maine. We then pivoted to updating the current model and rate methodology, which included 
meeting with national experts on the design and best practices. Most recently, in Summer 2022, 
the Department formally sought feedback from the provider community on challenges with the 
current design and policy requirements that may limit participation, while also gauging provider 
interest in establishing a PRTF in Maine pending policy updates. Nine of the fourteen providers 
who responded to our query expressed a potential interest in opening a PRTF in the future. 
Throughout the summer, the Department held meetings with national entities providing PRTF 
services across the country to understand successful service design and to seek feedback on 
Maine’s design. 
Following the work stated above, the Department is evaluating the feedback received from 
interested stakeholders and national experts, and making decisions on appropriate model changes, 
policy updates, and rate methodology revisions. Please note that it is out of the Department ’s 
control to force any provider to provide a particular service, including PRTF. This said, we believe 
the steps We are taking will increase the likelihood of a PRTF being established in Maine. For 
next steps, MaineCare will present the rate methodology for Section 107 of the MaineCare Benefits 
Manual to providers and interested parties in accordance with the Rate Determination process 
outlined in P.L. 2021 ch. 639. Reﬂected in our most recent budget initiative, the Department is
working to have a new rate established for April 1, 2023 and related mlemaking underway this 
spring. 
The Department strongly agrees there is a need for in-state PRTF offerings for children in order to 
provide a full range of behavioral health services in Maine. With respect to the recommendations 
set forth in LD 181, the Department opposes this bill considering that work to address this issue is 
well underway; including stakeholder feedback to inform the model and rate methodology, and, 
unfortunately, no bill will be successful in forcing a provider to deliver a service. 
I Will be happy to answer any questions you have and will plan to attend the work session.
