 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF LD 181,  Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Health, and Human Services to Implement Secure 
Children’s Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility Services  
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Dr. Deborah Hagler, 
MD, MPH. I am a resident of Brunswick, a pediatrician, and the immediate past president of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  
 In Maine we have no secure residential treatment facilities for youth  
with severe mental illness or developmental disabilities. These facilities  
can become necessary when these youths are a flight risk or have a  
history of aggression and judgment impairment t hat could represent a  
threat to others. This leaves youth in need of highly skilled treatment.  
Many youth are left waiting days to months in emergency rooms around the state until specialized placement can be arranged at an appropriate facility out 
of state. Not only are the practices of long emergency room waits and  
sending youth out of state exceptionally expensive, but families are  
unable to participate in treatment, visit, or plan for discharge when these  
children are discharged home. Additionally in some cases, Long Creek,  
the State’s only secure juvenile justice detention center, becomes the  facility of 
last resort for youth. This is an environment that is more punitive in nature than 
treatment /healing  oriented. As experts in child health, pediatricia ns know this 
type of confinement without proper treatment is not helping these youth. It is 
putting undue pressure on the patient/child, on the family, on the systems , and 
does not solve the underlying need for evidence -based  treatment. 
 
While these youth represent a very small slice of the youth needing  
Services  in Maine , they put a substantial strain on resources of our  families  and 
on the  systems and community until the appropriate level of care can be 
arranged.    
 Please take the necessary step to help ease the burden to all by supporting LD 
181 and Implement Secure Children’s Psychiatric Residential Treatment 
Facility Services  in Maine.  
  
