T’? 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 181 
"ResoIve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Implement Secure Children ‘s Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility 
Services" 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health & Human 
Services Committee, 
I'm Jayne Van Bramer, President & CEO of Sweetser and l’m here today to testify in support of 
LD 181, a Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Implement Secure 
Children ‘s Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility Services. 
Psychiatric residential treatment facilities are secure therapeutic residences providing non- 
hospital inpatient psychiatric care and treatment to youth with MaineCare/Medicaid coverage 
under the age of 21. 
These non-hospital settings are less restrictive than hospital settings and are a safe alternative 
for treating children who have a less acute psychiatric illness but still require a locked structured 
residential setting due to their serious emotional disorder. Care is provided under the guidance 
of a physician. 
Far too many Maine kids are in residential treatment facilities outside the state. While the 
majority are in New England, some children are as far away as Arkansas, Utah, and Illinois. We 
can bring them home where the care is closer to natural support systems and even save the state 
money. 
Maine is an outlier. Approximately 35 states operate PRTFs. Currently, Maine has under 100 
children's inpatient psychiatric beds and not a single PRTF. The result is that children languish 
untreated for days, if not weeks, and sometimes even months in ERs without active treatment - 
or they are stuck without a discharge plan in a more restrictive inpatient hospital, the most 
expensive treatment option we have. Make no mistake, these are children who cannot safely be 
treated with in-home services. Sweetser is a large children's residential provider and frequently 
we have to reject referrals of youth who are too dysregulated to function in an open-door 
residential setting even with intensive support. These trauma-stricken youth are subject to 
trafficking and/or running away and require the oversight of a physician directed treatment plan 
typically for medication management.
ji-"'* 
As this issue is discussed, you will certainly hear mention of the five-year nine state federal 
demonstration project asserting that children in PRTFs can be successfully and cost effectively 
served in the community. What is interesting about the results of that study is that the children 
who experienced the most positive outcomes in terms ofjuvenile justice involvement, improved 
school functioning, decreased drug and alcohol use, and increased social support were those 
youth that were transitioned out of PRTFs to home-based programs attesting to the importance 
of the PRTF service for the best outcomes. PRTFs are required to have a strong process fora 
team certification of the need for this level of service safeguarding against inappropriate 
utilization. 
I wholeheartedly support that our youth should be served in community settings when it is safe 
and appropriate to do so. And that our energy and resources need to be devoted to early 
developmental preventative services. But there is also a role and a place for a PRTF in Maine. 
And careful oversight of the placement process can ensure that only youth who will benefit from 
this setting are placed there. 
In closing, we know what the gap is in our service system and what is needed to develop a more 
comprehensive system of care for our youth. We need to act. 
Appreciate your time and the important work this committee is doing for our behavioral health 
system. 
Sincerely, 
We Jayne Van Bramer 
President & CEO
