295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAll ianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 181 
" Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Implement Secure Children's Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility 
Services " 
Sponsored by Senator Russell Black  
March 21, 2023  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and hardworking members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I 
am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s 
com munity based mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing 
services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for 
the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to 
enhance the quali ty and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 181, Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Health and Human Se rvices to Implement Secure 
Children's Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility Services .  
 
However, I first want to share the vision for Maine that the Alliance strives towards, 
“The behavioral health care needs of all Mainers are met with the highest quality 
and most compassionate care in the mos t appropriate environment .” We would 
emphasize  that treatment for children  with Serious Emotional D isturbance (SED) , and 
support for their families as well, should be based in  their home communities as the 
optimal location. They , and their families, should have access to a continuum of 
quality home and community care to meet their  needs .  
 
Unfortunately,  as we know all too clearly, the system of home and community 
behavioral  health treatment for Maine youth has been decimated over the past 
decade and we have long wait lists and high needs that are not being addresse d.  We 
have many youths  left in inappropriate  settings because we are lacking resources to 
serve them. Many languish in emergency de partments  and Long Creek, the State’s 
only secure juvenile justice detention center, becomes the facility of last resort for 
many . These options offer little  therapeutic support, and are more punitive in nature 
than treatment  or healing oriented . 
 
The Alliance , however, does not want to see funding shifted away from home and 
community services to support a new residential level of service in Maine . What we 
are advocating  is that not only do we invest more into our home and community 
system of care, we also add this one  level of care that Maine does not currently have 
in our continuum. We are very supportive of the investments in the propo sed budget 
that would lift the reimbursement rates for most MaineCare behavioral health 
services to a new baseline appropriate to the increased costs over the past decade, 
and we ask that this committe e direct the DHHS to al so offer both a realistic rate to 
support this missing level of secure residential treatment  along with grants to convert 
existing empt y residential beds or build out the cap acity for this level of treatment.  
 
Please give LD 181 a  unanimous O ught to Pass vote and invest in our youth and future.  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

