1\/IaineHealth 
Testimony of Robyn L. Ostrander MD 
In Support of LD 181, 
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Implement Secure Children's Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility 
Services" 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services, my name is Robyn Ostrander. I am testifying on behalf 
of MaineHealth in favor of LD 181, ”Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and 
Human Services to Implement Secure Children's Psychiatric Residential Treatment 
Facility Services." I have practiced Child Psychiatry for the past 18 years, initially in 
Brattleboro Vermont where I worked in inpatient and secure residential programs, then 
for the past 7 years in Southern Maine. I am currently the Division Medical Director of 
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry as well as the Vice Chair of Psychiatry at Maine Medical 
Center, and an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry with Tufts University School of 
Medicine. My medical degree is from Harvard Medical School. I completed training in 
Adult and Child Psychiatry at then-Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center in New 
Hampshire. 
For the bulk of my career, I provided treatment to school age and teenage patients ina 
staff-secure residential setting. It was not anything like juvenile detention. The doors 
were not locked. They were alarmed, so if a patient decided abruptly to leave, staff 
would follow them and talk to them until they returned safely, or gather more support if 
needed. Treatment included seeing a masters-level social work therapist for evidence 
based individual, family and group psychotherapy. They met with their psychiatrist (me) 
weekly, given the multiple co-morbid mental health conditions they experienced, and 
the complex medication regimens required for these youth who had already tried and 
been failed by introductory lines of medication. They had daily access to a nurse with 
specialty pediatric and psychiatric expertise, and daily contact with mental health 
technicians who supported them in the residential homes, at school and in the 
community. They attended an on-campus therapeutic school with instructors trained in 
special education and core subjects. They lived in house-style residences of 6 to 8 kids 
each. They saw pediatricians and dentists and gynecologists as needed, had time in the 
outdoors, visited local animal rescues and went on hikes. They learned life skills like 
grocery shopping, cooking and laundry. We even sent a few off to college. With time 
and a gentle hand, many formed therapeutic relationships with us which were deeply 
meaningful. 
Most importantly, throughout their care, they interacted with their families and other 
community supports like child protective services case workers often. Families, including 
siblings (and sometimes pets), attended treatment sessions and joined visits in the 
community. And yet these kids were among the most ill I have treated in my career. 
110 Free Street ' Portland, ME 04101-3908 Phone: 207-661-7001 Fax: 207-661-7029 www.ma1nehea1th org
They were largely survivors of extensive trauma and disrupted relationships with 
parents. They could not function safely in the community, many had violent or 
aggressive behaviors, and most had had many inpatient psychiatric hospitalizations. The 
beauty ofthe program was that they were allowed to be treated in their home state. 
They did not languish in psychiatric hospital beds or the emergency room. And they 
were not shipped out of state to programs where their families had little opportunity to 
visit or participate in their treatment. And, they got better. 
It is a great sadness to me that this level of care is not available to my patients now, in 
the state of Maine. Many patients can't be safely cared for in open residential programs, 
as is clear from the number of patients discharged from local residential facilities to 
emergency rooms. Emergency rooms are not treatment facilities for youth. They are 
loud environments which separate kids from their families, needed treatment, and their 
education, and they provide a minimum of medical care. 
Some youth are also stuck in inpatient psychiatric hospitals due to a lack of secure 
residential placement. These youth deteriorate in this restrictive setting, with limited 
time with family and friends and only minimal access to education. 
And for every child or teen languishing in a bed in our psychiatric hospitals for months 
to over a year, dozens of acutely ill children in Maine emergency rooms are unable to 
access the short-term inpatient care they need. Some would benefit from a brief 
psychiatric hospitalization, for example after a suicide attempt. Now their parents must 
choose for their child an extended wait in an emergency room, or going home witha 
treatment plan piecemealed together with community programs and waitlists. The new 
patient spots in my outpatient practice are almost all taken by highly risky patients 
referred from emergency rooms. Less ill children wait many months to see a child 
psychiatrist. 
In my 18 years practicing child psychiatry, l have never seen youth in Maine as ill as they 
are right now. You are no doubt aware that leading children's health organizations 
including the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, and the Children's Hospital Association have declared a national 
emergency in child and adolescent mental health. Youth are, simply, dying in record 
numbers. It is also a very challenging and unrewarding situation as a healthcare 
professional who has vowed to connect kids with needed medical treatment. Many of 
my peers prefer to work in other states where there is access to the care their patients 
need. 
We would never deny a child access to specialty care for other medical conditions. We 
would not tell families that kids need to go to Utah or Florida to get specialized cancer 
or cardiac care. The lack of state support for the levels of care needed to help our kids 
and teens has an opportunity to end, by funding the treatment which kids need, and 
healthcare providers in the state would like to offer. l strongly urge you to support this 
legislation.
