MAINE AFL-CIO 
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330
Tel. (207) 622-9  
(207) 622-9675
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org
President
Cynthia PhinneyVice President
Pat CarletonSecretary Treasurer
Doug Born
Testimony of Adam Goode, Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Neither For Nor Against 
LD 532 “An Act to Simplify the Plumbing and Heating Licensing Process”
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development and Economic Advancement, my name is Adam Goode. I am the Legislative & Political Director 
of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 working men and women in the state of Maine. We work to 
improve the lives and working conditions of our members and all working people. 
The licensure process helps ensure that people doing dangerous work are knowledgeable about the work they 
are doing. This process helps consumers, maintains public safety and allows workers to demonstrate that they 
meet industry standards. 
We are providing testimony “neither for nor against” this bill as we are unclear what the exact goals of the bill 
are. If the sponsor’s intent is to maintain the same benchmarks that currently exist for licenses, then we could be 
supportive. An approach that simply puts the same exact items on one application, but makes no substantive 
change to the licensure process for plumbers and for people who install or service solid fuel burning equipment 
or propane or natural gas burning equipment could be done in a way that does not compromise the integrity in 
these professions. 
We are skeptical that is the intent of this legislation. Putting current items on one application does not make any 
change to the process. Not knowing the exact problem that the bill seeks to address, we would ask some key 
questions before going forward.
First, solid fuel, gas and oil fit together. We don’t see plumbing as fitting in with those three professions. 
What is the reason for merging these specific licenses?
If Maine moves in the direction of one application process, would someone not be able to get a 
plumbing license without a solid fuel, gas and oil license? We would be opposed to a process that does 
not allow someone to get one license and not the other.
Plumbing and gas are two very different things. Could changing any of the requirements for licensure 
for one of these trades based on the other trade create any problems?
Why is oil not included in the bill?
Are any requirements for the current licensure process being changed due to the merging of the 
application process?
There are some very real problems related to workers accessing propane licenses currently. In researching the 
bill, we learned that the state only has one person working on this licensure process. Short staffing makes it 
harder for people to get questions answered related to licensure.
We have heard from workers in the industry that 80% of applicants for the propane and natural gas license fail 
on the 1st or 2nd attempt. That number is glaring. Merging the application process won’t fix that problem and 
Printed In House with Union Labor

could even create more problems associated with people doing dangerous jobs should licensure standards be 
compromised.
We look forward to working with you on the bill
