Introduction  
My name is Beau Libby and I currently work for the NESPTA and represent Local 
716 Plumbers, Pipefitters & HVAC/R Techs. I have been in the piping trades for 
25+ yrs.  I am neither for nor against this proposal.  I do currently hold a gas 
license with large endorsements, Master oil under 15 gal/hr, Journeyman over 15 
gal/hr, Ep 608, Solid Fuel apprentice license. I am also a board member for the 
Maine State Fuel Board.  
Proposed Bill Summary 
This bill requires the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation 
to establish a streamlined application process that allows a person to 
submit a single application in order to apply for licenses to work as a 
plumber and licenses to install or service solid fuel burning equipment or 
propane or natural gas burning equipment.  
 
Testimony  
Plumbers help protect the health of our nation. Changing or altering a plumbing 
system without proper training and knowledge of the plumbing systems can 
create major issues based on the fact that there are many different types of 
plumbing and venting systems out there today. A proper venting system is a very 
important part of the system.   
 
Proper venting allows air to enter the system and maintain a proper air pressure 
that allows proper drainage of sewage and greywater from the system. If altered 
or changed it could compromise the entire system from draining sewage and grey 
water properly not to mention that improper or altered piping in a plumbing 
system can also cause sewer gases to migrate past the trap seal and get into 
occupied livable spaces causing sickness. A plumber is also responsible for 
protecting our drinking water. If certain piping is improperly altered or changed 
can create contamination of our public and private drinking supply. 
 
If the current benchmarks for each license listed remains the same, and the bill is 
more about alleviating possible paperwork problems or maybe a shortage of 
admin help, and there is no substantive change to requirements then we could be 
supportive to this bill.  With this being said, the proposed bill is very unclear on 
the intent. We want legislators to ask relative questions and really understand the 
problem this bill is trying to alleviate and to think about how these changes could 
affect the licensure. I feel 
Solid fuel, gas can go together based on the fact that most of these licenses 
requirements are based on a common type of system with basically the same 
process for most piping and equipment being installed. Not so for a plumbing 
system. 
 
Changing any requirement for one license based on the other could impose real 
problems to the public. If changing the application process is needed, then 
legislators should consider if there are other reasons creating the imposed 
changes.  
 
1. Are we trying to merge these specific licenses and Why? 
2. If there is one application process, would someone not be able to get 
a plumbing license without a solid fuel or gas license?  
3. Would you be able to get a gas license without a plumbing license? 
4. Why is the Oil license being left out? 
5. Why is the EP 608 license being left out? 
6. Is there any of the requirements of the licensure process being 
changed? 
7. Are they looking at all State licensing processes? If not, why just the 
trades? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
