  Hello, my name is Michael Winchenbach and I’m the current business Agent for local 716 Plumbers, 
Pipefitters and HVAC techs. I hold Maine state Gas, Oil and 608 refrigeration licenses. I started as an 
apprentice 12 years ago at local 716 and held a job as a HVAC Service/Install tech for Siemens Industries 
up until a year ago. While working for Siemens my job was to service or install heating and cooling 
systems. As a HVAC tech I worked on residential and Industrial equipment in Public Schools, State of 
Maine Facilities, Prisons, Court Houses, Hospitals, Manufacturing Facilities across the state of Maine. 
While working at Siemens I’ve also been an instructor for our local the last 5 years. During the last 5 
years I’ve taught Propane and Natural Gas Service Tech licensing, Propane and Natural Gas Industrial 
Classes for licensing, Hydronics for heating and colling, Blueprint drawing and interpretation, Pipetrades 
related Math and 608 refrigerant licensing for the trades.  
 Summary of Purposed Licensing 
   This bill requires the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation to establish 17 a streamlined 
application process that allows a person to submit a single application in 18 order to apply for licenses to 
work as a plumber and licenses to install or service solid fuel 19 burning equipment or propane or 
natural gas burning equipment.
Testimony 
   I would like to first say that I’m “Neither for Nor Against as we are unclear what the exact goals of this 
bill are”. My goals today are to talk to you about the trades Plumbing, Oil, Gas and solid fuel licenses 
may work or don’t work together if changes are made. If this bill is to just change the process of applying 
for a license and to keep the current qualifications in place, then I could be supportive of this bill. The 
number one factor for any legislator should be, public safety and all of the qualifications for licensing 
currently in place. When I read the purposed bill, I don’t understand the issue this bill is trying to 
address. I’m asking for the legislators to truly understand, what the purpose of this purposed bill and 
what is this bill really addressing.
Is this bill being purposed for streamlining the licensing process so that one person can create a 
profile with the State of Maine Fuel board, to easily add an endorsement for new licenses? 
Is this being purposed to combined a Plumbing, Gas and Solid Fuel licenses together.
Why is an Oil License left out of this purposed bill. 
Does this mean you would need to have all 3 qualifications such as a Solid Fuel, Gas and 
Plumbing endorsement to hold a license. 
Would a person be able to hold a plumbing license without the other two solid fuels and Gas 
endorsements.
When changing the dynamics of the licensing process, the legislators should consider the 
possibility of creating new issues to a already complicated process. 
Oil, Gas and Solid fuels are licensing that go together when working in the trades. Plumbing is 
truly another trade all together.  
Responsible licensing is an issue already, Legislators need to ask is this the way to resolve any 
current issues. 
The State of Maine fuel Board currently has one person in the office handling the licensing 
process. Mary does an amazing job and I’m not sure how she does it. Getting her some could 
help would defiantly improve the process. 
Are any of the requirements for the current licenses in this Bill being changed. 
Merging the licenses together won’t fix the issue with the failure rates for the new applicants.  
With the trades being so different, changing the requirements on one or the other would 
impose even more public safety problems. 
   With all of these questions and no answer, can the Legislators make a informed change in the 
process of licensing without understanding the process and the licensed trades. The trades such as 
Oil, Gas, Solid Fuels go together because these licenses overlap when it comes to venting, 
combustion Air and electrical.  Plumbing is required on these systems when connections are made 
to a Domestic waterline or a condensate drain. The electrical part of Oil, Gas and Solid fuels are 
pretty much the same when it comes to service or a new install.  I’m not saying that a Plumber can’t 
be a great service tech in any of these trades, it’s the alignment of the licensing purposed in this Bill. 
I hope to receive more clarification on this purposed bill before any changes are made. Thank you 
for your time and hearing my concerns today. 
Michael Winchenbach 
BA Local 716 
          
     
