295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1429  
“An Act to Establish a Navigator Position in the  
Department of  Health and Human Services for  
Families and Children Involved in  the Foster Care System ” 
Sponsored by Representative Fay  
April 25 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health 
and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy,  and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community -based  
mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I  am here today to speak in support of LD 1429  
“An Act to Establish a Navigator Position in the Department of  Health and Human 
Services for Families and Children Involved in  the Foster Care System .” 
 
The foster care system can be a complex and confusing pro cess for families and 
children, and it can be difficult for them to navigate the various services and resources 
that are available to them. A Navigator Position in the Department of Health and Human 
Services could serve as a point of contact and support fo r these families, helping them 
to understand the system and access the resources they need.  
 
Children in the foster care system often face multiple challenges that can impact their 
mental health and well -being. These challenges can include separation from their 
biological families, uncertainty about their future, and exposure to traumatic 
experiences such as abuse or neglect. Children may also face mental health challenges 
as a result of their experiences , such as neglect or abuse, as well  as the transition to a 
new family and environment. Some children may struggle with attachment issues, 
anxiety, depression, or behavioral problems.  
 
It is important for children in the foster care system to receive comprehensive mental 
health services and support to address their unique needs. This may include therapy, 
counseling, and access to appropriate medicat ion. A Navigator could help r esource 
families access these services . Additionally, it is important for resource parents, 
caregivers, and other adults in the child's life to receive education and training on how 
to support the child's mental health and well -being.  
 
A Navigator Positio n in the Department of Health and Human Services for families and 
children involved in the foster care system could play an important role in improving the 
lives of these children and their families in addition to addressing some of the 
challenges that the y face.  I urge  members of this committee  to vote to support this bill. I 
am happy to bring additional information to the work session.  
 
Thank you for your attention to this important  issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
