 
1 of 2 
  Adoptive & Foster Families of Maine Inc.  
 and The Kinship Program  
304 Hancock Street  
Suite 2A                                                                                                                                                                           
Bangor, ME. 04401                                                                                                                                                 
Travis@AFFM.net                                                                                                                                                           
207-827-2331  
                                                                                                                                    
May 2nd, 2023,  
 
ATTN: Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
In Re: LD  1429,  An Act to Establish a Navigator Position in the Department of Health and 
Human Services for Families and Children Involved in the Foster Care System  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Serv ice Committee,  
 
My name is Travis Bryant and I am responding in my capacity as Executive Director of 
Adoptive and Foster Families of Maine, Inc. & The Kinship Program to testify neither for nor 
against LD 1429.  
 
Before I go into the details of this testim ony I would like to acknowledge that May is National 
Foster Care Month. I would like to thank the 1,661 foster homes that are currently licensed and 
providing care to one of Maine's most vulnerable populations of youth 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week. I woul d also like to thank all families who previously fostered and welcome any person 
who is thinking about fostering or wanting to be involved in supporting resource families.  
 
Adoptive and Foster Families of Maine, Inc. & The Kinship Program (AFFM) provides p eer 
support navigation to adoptive, foster, and kinship caregivers, also known as resource families. 
AFFM's mission is to provide the training, guidance, knowledge, and resources needed to handle 
complex issues encountered by resource families as they open  their hearts and homes to children 
in need. AFFM has fifteen full -time employees, three part -time employees, and seven per diem 
trainers whom all have lived experience as a member of a resource family.  Of the staff working 
at AFFM, eight of the staff pro vide direct navigation support to resource families. AFFM also 
has 30 trained peer mentors and 19 support groups, also known as C.A.R.E.S. meetings; These 
supports are available to assist families in small group settings or on a one -on-one basis. AFFM 
work s closely with many other agencies, collaboratives, and committees such as; The Family 
Focused Treatment Association, A Family For Me, The Resource Parent Care Team, The 
Resource Parent Advisory Committee, The Kinship Navigator Advisory Committee, The Yout h 
Leadership Advisory Team, The Maine Chapter American Academy of Pediatrics Foster Care 

 
2 of 2 Committee and The Office of Child Family Services. Though many others also support resource 
families and children in foster care; the organizations and collaboratives mentioned above have 
specific missions and or dedicated programs that support resource families.   
 
AFFM can not speak for all of the wonderful supportive programs out there, however, AFFM 
would like to share some of the information received from the work and interactions they have 
experienced within the foster care community. Resource families call AFFM for support on how 
to navigate a variety of services, and systems. Over the past year (5/1/22 to 4/30/23) AFFM staff 
have directly connected with 910 resou rce parents. Anecdotally resource families express there 
are several areas that need more resources:  
● Increased communication and access to information that is vital to providing day -to-day 
care for the youth that are a part of their family.  
● Timely payment for reimbursements, board rates, and the child care subsidy program 
(CCSP).   
● Increase access to childcare providers who are willing to work with CCSP.  
● Increase access to Behavioral & Mental Health providers, Medical providers, and Dental 
providers who accept patients who are insured by MaineCare.  
● And an increase of resource families to help provide respite opportunities.  
 
For years the supply of these resources has struggled to meet the demand. Resource families are 
an important lifeline tow ards increasing the chances of positive outcomes for children and 
parents in Maine who are experiencing very difficult and challenging times. Child welfare is 
fraught with highly emotional situations that are compounded by trauma, neurodiversity, 
communica tion barriers, and financial stressors; amazingly, some families endure these 
difficulties.  
 
LD 1429 brings forth some much -needed attention to foster care in Maine and whether it is 
passed or not I hope the 131st legislation continues to consider ways to elevate the need to 
support resource families in our state. I hope that they consider an approach that leans into the 
voices of resource families and their day -to-day realities. I thank you for your time and the 
consideration of decreasing access barriers and increasing the awareness of services and supports 
that are currently being offered.  
 
If you have any questions regarding my testimony or support for resource families,  please 
contact me at 207 -817-6064 or e -mail travis@affm.net.  
 
 
Respectfully submitte d by:  
 
 
Travis Bryant  
Executive Director  
 
