 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 1300 - An Act to Give the Governing Board of a Municipality Input into the Budget Developed by a 
School Board  
 
May 2 , 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs 
Committee , my name is Rebecca Lambert,  and I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 1 300 on behalf 
of Maine Municipal  Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy C ommittee (LPC). For 
reference, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.   
 
 School board members are the boots on the ground people who are elected to navigate and pay 
attention to the details relating to school budgets and policy. Likewise, elected municipal officials do a 
similar job for the local governments across Maine. Both bodies utilize subcommittee meetings, such as a curriculum subcommittee or a recreation subcommittee, to flesh out the minute details and bring back recommendations for the full board or council to consider.  
  Municipal officials agree that to also have the governing body of a municipality vote to approve 
the school budget before it goes for a validation refe rendum, is redundant and a dysfunctional way to 
operate. There are several opportunities for local leaders and community members to weigh in during the  
school budget process  and some school boards invite the appointed and elected leaders within their 
commu nities to attend a public meeting specifically to provide them with an opportunity to ask questions 
and provide input  on the budget . 
 
 While there is definite merit to having municipal leaders involved in the school budget process, 
they already possess the  ability  to engage with school board members and to send along any information 
they deem to be helpful while the school board develops the budget. Adding a step  would slow down the 
overall process , which already contends with a  tight timeline . 
 
Thank you for your time and for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
