iriliiiiir 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
B05395 Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES webslw WWW~'”smaWeb-com ,_,,,,,,.S,.,,.,,,15.,I,.,,,,m,,de,,,s,,.,..,m,,,, 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1300 
AN ACT TO GIVE THE GOVERNING BOARD OF A MUNICIPALITY INPUT 
INTO THE BUDGET DEVELOPED BY A SCHOOL BOARD 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1300. 
MSSA and MSBA are each providing testimony in opposition to this bill as it is not appropriate. In many 
situations it duplicates processes that are in place. 
As for General Duties in 20-A, §I00l, - sub§2, Management of school property, and -sub§8, Operate public 
preschools, kindergarten and grades I-12, school board members have the responsibility for developing a 
budget and operating the schools. Additionally, in 20-A, §l48l-A, Apportionment of Costs for a Regional 
School Unit, it states speciﬁcally that “A regional school unit (MSAD and CSD) may raise money, in addition to the 
local contribution pursuant to section 15690. subsection 1, for establishing and maintaining public schools, erecting 
buildings and providing equipment for educational purposes. The additional costs of operating a regional school unit 
must be shared among all municipalities within the regional school unit by the same local share percentages for each 
municipality resulting from the determination of the local contribution under section 15688.” To raise funds the board of 
directors through 20-A, §l482, Budget Preparation, shall prepare an annual budget to plan for the necessary 
expenditures regarding: A. Operational costs; B. Bonds falling due; C. Interest on bonds or other obligations; D. 
Rentals and other charges in a contract; and E. Temporary loans. Authority is provided to the regional school board 
(MSAD or CSD) to prepare the annual budget and to conduct a school budget meeting to gain initial approval of the 
necessary funds. 
School boards of a regional school unit, school administrative district and consolidated school district have the authority 
to identify necessary proposed expenditures and include them within a proposed budget. They are and need to be the 
best advocates they can be for the needs of the students they serve. Their budgets are developed with these needs in 
mind after very thoughtful consideration of what they want, what they need, what they know they cannot possibly 
request, and deferred maintenance areas they know they’ll have to return to another year. There is always much 
conversation and consideration as to what a particular commtmity and school district can sustain given the educational 
needs of the students within a district. 
School board members and superintendents work diligently with town and city officials to determine what the balance 
of education and municipal expenditures might be during any one year. School board members are responsible for 
determining the needs of the school district. Mtmicipal officials are responsible for determining the needs of their towns 
and cities. They are two distinct entities who do need to work together to determine what will be in the best interest of 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
students and resident taxpayers. Yet their roles are separate. It is true that municipal oﬁicials have responsibility for tax 
impact within their town or city. Taxes are impacted by the school assessment to the town. School oﬂicials work hard to 
communicate what the needs of the district will be and engage these folks in discussion as to how this might be 
accomplished or what might need to wait another year. This is true at the smallest town level to the larger city level. 
School boards are the governing body for their school administrative tmit. To allow towns / cities within the RSU, 
MSAD, and CSD to make amendments and require the approval by a majority vote of the members present 
representing the school board and municipal ofﬁcials, by individual town, totally alters the design and authority 
provided the RSU, MSAD and/or CSD. This would segment the votes, require additional meetings within an already 
busy budget approval process and potentially stall or destroy a budget approval procedure that already at times is tight to 
have ready for July 1, the start of the next ﬁscal year. Additionally, getting the budget to be approved by each 
municipality ’s officials could be nearly an impossible task. Some may say the budget is too high and not approve it. 
Others may say more needs to be included and not approve it. 
MSSA and MSBA oppose L.D. 1300. Autonomy for decision making should be retained by the RSU, MSAD and 
CSD, while the budget determination process should continue to be a collaborative process. Voters within the RSU, 
MSAD and CSD have the opportunity to make their wishes known at the school budget meeting, and then, if still in 
place, at the Budget Validation Referendum. These are regional school units, made up of many towns, who all voted to 
join together for the structure that now exists, to support the students within their districts.
