Tyler Backus
OAKLAND
LD 1300
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing: My name is Tyler Backus and I am a resident of Oakland, Maine. I write to 
you today in opposition to LD 1300, An Act to Give the Governing Board of a 
Municipality Input into the Budget Developed by a School Board.
Though I suspect most do not need the reminder of current statute, but given the 
submission of this bill I feel the importance in reminding the committee in Title 30-A,
section 117, subsection 2252 reads “"Political subdivision" means any municipality, 
plantation, county, quasi-municipal corporation and special purpose district, 
including, but not limited to, any water district, sanitary district, hospital district, 
municipal transmission and distribution utility and school administrative unit. "School
administrative unit" has the same meaning as found in Title 20-A, section 1, 
subsection 26.”
So my opposition to this bill is that no political subdivision of the state should have 
special voice or vote in the budget of any other political subdivision of the state. Or, 
put another way, why does this bill not support every political subdivision having a 
vote on every other political subdivision budget that it shares territory with, which 
would occur after the governing board and the citizens in the political subdivision 
have already voted on the budget?
I also took the time to look at the process for both county and municipal budget 
processes. In neither case was it clear that there exist as many chances for a budget to 
fail as there is in a school budget, nor does it appear there to be the ability for as much
input and understanding from regular citizens as there is in the school budget process. 
In neither county or municipal budgets does there appear to be a special meeting, 
prior to the board approval, for the citizens to ask questions and voice concerns about 
portions of the budget. Also, unlike municipal and county budgets, school budgets go 
through both a budget meeting and a separate referendum vote at the polls.
I suspect that maybe the sponsors of the bill should first consider bringing municipal 
and county budgets to same standard that school budgets undergo, which includes my 
own state representative, prior to suggesting additional levels of oversight for school 
budgets.
For these reason I am in opposition to LD 1300.

