      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 14, 2023  
 
Re: LD 462, An Act to Assist Persons Experiencing Homelessness in Areas of High Rent by 
Seeking a Waiver from the Federal Government  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine or 
CHOM .  CHOM  houses Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocates on their behalf .  I also 
chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care Board of 
Directors, as well as the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee.   
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 462, An Act to Assist Persons Experiencing 
Homelessness in Areas of High Rent by Seeking a Waiver from the Federal Government .  This bill 
provides that, for an area where the actual fair market rent for existing housing is greater than the 
fair market rent calculated by HUD, MaineHousing  is require d to seek a temporary waiver of the 
requirements of the Section 8 housing program administered by HUD or any other federal housing 
assistance program to permit additional funds to cover the cost of the actual fair market rent for a 
person who is homeless.  
 
As you know, t here is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine:  
Waitlists for affordable housing exceed 30,000 households  and more than 25,000 Maine 
households are on waiting lists for federal rental assistance, often waiti ng five to ten years.   
And people who have recently received federal rental assistance are having an increasingly 
difficult time finding available rental units  at all, let alone ones that have rents that a rental 
voucher can accommodate.   
 
The ESAC Long Te rm Stayers Committee , which includes 20 participating organizations , has 
housed 427 of the longest stayers in homelessness  with the most complex needs  in Maine over 
the last eight  years, and also demonstrated that this population is as many as 57 times more 
likely to be in jail and 29 times more likely to be in the hospital when unhoused vs housed.  Housing this population saves us a lot of money and is a game changer for each pers on.  Our 
biggest problem is finding it.    
 
The vast majority of LTS housed through the ESAC LTS Initiative has been through scattered-
site housing first approach.  This model feather s homeless populations into housing using 
rental subsidies.  Outreach serv ices are provided to ensure people maintain stability in their 
housing.  This model has had a success rate between 90 -95% since the initiative began.  
However, this model is dependent upon finding and securing market housing with rents that 
work with renta l subsidy maximums.  With extremely low vacancy rates and soaring rents, this 
has become exceedingly difficult.  
 
Rental assistance levels the playing field for people who can’t afford housing.  Housing 
vouchers  make housing affordable for people with low i ncomes in Maine, especially so for 
people with extremely low incomes -  the population of people experiencing homelessness.  
Requesting a temporary waiver from the federal government for Section 8 and other federal 
housing vouchers, for areas in the state w here the actual fair market rent for existing housing is 
greater than the fair market rent calculated by HUD  to permit additional funds to cover the cost 
of the actual fair market rent for a person who is homeless  will greatly assist this population in 
attaining truly affordable, stable housing in the community.   
 
Please support LD 462 so that we can all work together to end and prevent homelessness in 
Maine.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
