, “,1 
V 
1 MaineHousing 2 MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Texlimolyz of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The ]oint Select Committee on Housing 
LD 462 An Act to Assist Persons Experiencing Homelessness in 
Areas of High Rent by Seeking a Waiver from the Federal Government 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the ]oint Select Committee on Housing, I am 
Erik Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State 
Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony in respectful opposition to LD 
462 An Act to Assist Persons Experiencing Homelessness in Areas of High Rent by Seeking a 
Waiver from the Federal Government 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to 
ﬁnance single family mortgages for first time homebuyers and for affordable multi—family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low~income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
This bill seeks to address a problem that is real, which is the disparity between federal “section 8” 
Housing Assistance payment standards and actual rental rates. In many places, a voucher simply will 
not provide enough assistance to meet the cost of market rent. Nobody cares more about these 
sorts of issues than Representative Madigan, and I have the utmost respect for her advocacy on 
behalf of her constituents. But we do not believe that the proposed remedy outlined in this bill isa 
workable one. 
First, MaineHousing does not have jurisdiction over most of the vouchers in Maine, and therefore 
we can’t seek a waiver on behalf of vouchers we don’t control. Voucher programs are mostly 
handled locally, by Maine’s public housing authorities. In areas where there is no PHA,
1
Mainehousing serves that role and issues vouchers, but in total We administer only about 1 /3 of the 
approximately 12,000 vouchers in Maine. 
Secondly HUD does not provide for any sort of temporary waiver of its FMR rates. There are 
established Ways to request a permanent Waiver from HUD. HUD allows all agencies with Housing 
Choice Voucher programs to reevaluate Fair Market Rents through a rigorously deﬁned 
methodology that requires the agency to submit the request via the Federal Register and a detailed 
mail survey paid for by the administering agency. There are 19 FMR areas in Maine and in order to 
request a reevaluation the requesting agency or agencies must administer 75% of the vouchers in 
that area. In 2020 MaineHousing conducted a successful FMR reevaluation for Knox, Lincoln, and 
Waldo counties that cost over $30,000 just for collecting the required data. A re-evaluation process 
requires an extraordinary amount of staff time and consultant costs, and it is by no means 
guaranteed to be successful. 
Like many PHA’s in Maine, MaineHousing already has a temporary Waiver in place for its vouchers 
that allows us to 120% of FMR, but this will be rolling back with the end of pandemic assistance. 
Finally, it is important (and this rnight be the most important factor) to note that successful 
reevaluation increases the value of the voucher, but it does not bring any extra funding from HUD. 
It just means that you can spend more on some vouchers but the funding has to come from other 
vouchers within your pool. 
MaineHousing and our local public housing authority partners have long called on HUD to make 
FMR reevaluation easier, less of a financial burden to conduct, and to fully fund the voucher 
program. But at the moment, those are all just wishes. And for those reasons we do not believe 
that this bill will achieve what it seeks to do.
2
