Mase Peterson ’s Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Housing 
L.D. 462: “An Act to Assist Persons Experiencing Homelessness in Areas of High Rent by Seeking a 
Waiver from the Federal Government ”; sponsored by Rep. Madigan of Waterville. 
Public Hearing: February l4, 2023, 9:00 AM 
“Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Committee: 
My name is Mase Peterson, I’ve been a resident of Waterville, Maine for almost six 
years, and I am testifying in support of LD 462. 
First, I’d like to express gratitude to Representative Madigan for sponsoring this bill and 
for supporting legislation that seeks to address the very urgent housing crisis in this state. 
Looking at me and hearing me speak today, you would not know my history or identity so I will 
tell you instead. I was born and raised in western North Carolina with two parents who were both 
opioid addicts. My mother, like many folks out there, suffered tremendously due to poverty, 
addiction, economic inequality, and intergenerational trauma; and as a result, she was never 
capable of owning a home of her own and her children were oﬁen at the mercy of an unstable 
upbringing. One memory I recall, which is to this day one of the most formative out of all my 
life experience, was the night my mother parked outside on an empty driveway of a tiny church 
and told me, a kid who couldn’t have been more than 8-years old, to lie down in the backseat. I 
questioned her and wanted to know why we were sleeping in a car instead of a bed. She got 
defensive and angry, and I could sense that it was because she was scared and humiliated to be 
my parent. I was a very attuned child but I still believed that our instability, a byproduct ofa 
system engineered to suppress poor and working-class people, was somehow my fault. 
And since becoming an adult, I’ve done everything in my power to make sure I never 
return to that unstable position. Not due to resilience or courage but out of fear, shame, and 
paranoia that I might one day go back to being the helpless child with no agency. But it’s 
necessary to understand that the trajectory of my life changed due to two major contributing 
factors: 1) community support, including family, chosen family, and my friends; and 2) material 
assistance. Because of these two factors, it is a miracle that I am standing here with you today,a 
ﬁrst-generation college graduate who got a job right after school and can now pay their own rent 
in a disastrous housing market. You may think of people like me as the posterchildren of an 
American dream but I urge you to hear this, instead, as a dire waming. Without material 
assistance and concrete solutions like the ones that LD 462 will enable, hannful cycles will 
continue. Homelessness begets trauma. Trauma begets homelessness. ‘Both are mutually 
reinforcing forces that have shaped my outlooks of the world and if I had the chance to live my 
life again without that constant uncertainty haunting me everyday, even if it meant taking away 
all of my adult achievements, there is no question. If it meant not having to be the one to stand 
up here today and convince you that this bill is worth considering, there is absolutely no 
question. 
I implore you to support LD 462 and I thank you all for your time.”
