 
  
 
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of  
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services  
 
In Favor of LD 1785  – Resolve, to Establish the Blue 
Ribbon Commission to Make Recommendations to 
Update Laws Governing the Continuum of  
Long -term Care Options  
 
Provided on May 10 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Baldacci, Representative M eyer, and the members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee.  
My name is Jena Jones and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, mu nicipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 1785.  
Nearly 300,000 people are over 65 in Maine, with another 108,000 are between 60 and 64, 
meaning the number of people 65 and older is going to grow exponentially in the next four years.  
1 in 4 people over the age of 65 are projected to need more than one y ear of paid support over 
the remainder of their lifetime . This means right now, about 75,000 older Mainers need home 
care, assisted living, or nursing home level of care, and will continue to need that care.  Yet, 
according to the most recent AARP Long Ter m Care Scorecard, Maine ranks 47th in cost of 
nursing home care and 50th in cost of home care.  Put frankly, most people in need of care in 
Maine cannot afford it unless they qualify for MaineCare or waiver services.   
However, even if you are entitled to receive home care or nursing home care under MaineCare, 
our current direct care workforce crisis means many people who are entitled to care will go 
without it.  A recent report released by the Department of Health & Human Services this year 
shows that 772 older people  (33%)  who are entitled Section 19  waiver home care services and 
407 older people  (53%) entitled under Section 63  aren’t getting some or all of the home care they 
need  because of staffing shortages.1 Nursing homes are at 79% occupancy because of staffing 
shortages .2  
As we’ve heard for several years now, whether you can pay for care or not, if you end up in the 
hospital, there’s a good chance your discharge will be delayed by the lack of home care and 
nursing home care services in Main e.  In fact, according to a report just released by the Maine 
Center for Economic Policy titled, The High Cost of Undervaluing Direct Care Work , patients 
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline -files/AAAA -Annual -Report -February -2023.pdf   
2 Ibid.  

 
 are languishing in hospital beds  for days, weeks, sometimes months  longer than necessary  
because there  are too few workers  in long term care facilities .3  
Numerous actions  have been taken  to resolve this workforce shortage, but they are only 
stabilizing the workforce, not growing it.4 Two weeks ago another Maine nursing home, The 
Commons at Tall Pines of Belfast, announced it is shutter ing its doors, displacing 55 residents.   
Forced relocation can result in early death for patients, yet we don’t treat these closures as 
significantly as  we would if any other type of economic engine were closing in a community.  
It’s time to acknowledge that we allow for closures and resulting deaths because we value the 
lives of the people in nursing homes differently.  
Because of this, we urge the Commi ttee to amend LD 1785 to include direct inquiry into the 
impact on people who are not getting the care they are entitled to receive, on people who are 
forced to relocate their homes when a nursing home closes, or are required to “live” in hospitals.  
These challenges are not disappearing  and we must  apply every effort to understand and correct 
the situation to ensure every Mainer who needs care and support has access to it when it is 
needed. LD 1785  represents a solution and an opportunity for increased ove rsight within the 
delivery of our long -term care services.   
The Commission will provide much -needed information  and guidance  on Maine’s demographics 
and the need for care, labor market conditions, and the structures within the systems to ensure 
maximum eff iciency and quality in the delivery of care to people in need.   
We urge you to support another opportunity to correct Maine’s persistent challenges in accessing 
care by voting in favor of LD 1785.  
Thank you.  
Jena Jones  
 
 
 
3 https://www.mecep.org/health -care/the -high -cost-of-undervaluing -direct -care -work/  
 
