 
The Maine Long-Te rm Care  
OMBUDSMAN 
Program    61 Winthrop  Street  • Augusta,  ME 04330  
1-800-499-0229  • Fax 207-621-0509  
MLTCOP@MaineOmbudsman.org
 
 
TESTIMONY 
                                                               IN SUPPORT OF 
 
LD 1785; “Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Make Recommendations      
                to Update Laws Governing the Continuum of Long-term Care Options” 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
May 10, 2023 
                                     Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  
 
My name is Laura Harper. I am a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. I am here today 
to present testimony in support of this legislation on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program. The Ombudsman Program is a nonprofit agency that provides statewide 
advocacy for older and disabled residents of nursing homes, residential care and assisted living 
and for recipients of home care services. Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals 
who experience barriers in accessing the long-term services and supports they need when they 
are ready for discharge.  
 
This resolve establishes the Blue Ribbon Commission to review the laws governing residential 
options including but not limited to long-term care, assisted living facilities and other residential 
options, and to make recommendations to the Legislature on changes to the State’s laws in 
order to reflect the State’s changing demographics and labor market conditions and to ensure 
that the State has the capacity to meet current and future needs of people needing residential 
options.  
 
Long-term services and supports across the continuum have faced significant challenges in 
recent years. The shortage of direct care staff both in home care and long-term care facilities 
have impacted access to care. Nursing homes and residential care have limited admissions due 
to staffing vacancies and many have been forced to use agency staff to meet the needs of 
residents at a much higher cost. Home care recipients who need services to remain 

independent in the community may receive fewer hours of services than they qualify for or no 
services at all, placing them at risk. Patients in hospitals may wait for extended periods of time 
for admission to a long-term care facility. Additionally, there have been closures of both nursing 
homes and residential care across the state. The Ombudsman Program has received an 
increasing number of requests for assistance for older and disabled individuals who cannot 
access the long-term services and supports they need.  
 
In 2022, five nursing homes closed. Some of these were multilevel facilities with both nursing 
home beds and residential care beds. In 2023, one additional nursing home closed with the last 
resident moving in January. At present, a second nursing home located in Belfast is in the 
process of closing which will result in 37 older and disabled residents being moved. The 
Ombudsman Program is helping residents and their families to be sure their concerns are heard 
and that residents are moved as close to home as possible. Unfortunately, finding placement 
has become increasingly difficult as more and more homes have closed. Additionally, the limit 
on admissions for many nursing homes has created an additional challenge in finding another 
placement. 
 
When a long-term care home closes, it is extremely difficult for residents and their families. 
Relocation stress can result from a move and may cause a decline in condition, depression, an 
increase in falls and other poor outcomes. There are numerous studies that document these 
risks. 
 
Delayed discharge of patients in hospitals may result not only from long-term care facilities 
limiting admission but from complex medical conditions as well as behavioral health needs that 
nursing homes and residential care homes are unable to meet. 
 
The Blue Ribbon Commission can accomplish much by reviewing the causes of the closures of 
nursing homes and residential care. Barriers to remaining open can be identified with 
recommendations for changes to prevent additional closures. Consideration of the future need 
for care across the continuum in consideration of the expansion of the population of individuals 
over age 65 would be considered by the Commission. The Executive Director of the Maine 
Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program will be pleased to serve as a commission member. 
 
The Needs Assessment and Quality Initiative for long-term services and supports currently 
being conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services is an important effort that 
can also accomplish a comprehensive review of reimbursement, quality and access to services 
now and into the future. The work on this important initiative has begun bringing stakeholders 
together with a broad base of expertise to consider these issues. The work of the Blue Ribbon 
Commission can complement well the efforts of the Department’s initiative.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.maineombudsman.org  
