Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 1 0, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee of Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100   
 
Re:  LD 1 785 - Resolve, to Establish the Blue-Ribbon  Commission to Make Recommendations 
to Update the Laws Governing the Continuum of Long -term Care Options  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standin g Committee on 
Health and Human Services:   
 
This letter provides information regarding LD 1 785. The Department is opposed to  this bill  
because it is largely duplicative of work already underway . 
 
Earlier this year, the Department launched a significant reform effort  to strengthen  long-term 
services and supports (LTSS) through payment reform with a renewed emphasis on access, 
quality and innovation. Our work is informed  by 56 stakeholders  serving on three groups, 
including advocates , researchers, geriatricians, and providers  from across the continuum of 
Maine’s long -term service s and supports  system (Attachment A).  
 
The work of two of these groups (LTSS Needs Assessment and Rate  Setting) is short -term, 
scheduled to be completed by this fall .  The LTSS Needs Assessment group is helping the 
Department map current LTSS capacity and future needs by geographic location (either by 
county or hospital service area , depending on input fro m the group) . The Rate Setting group is 
helping the Department design a new payment methodology for nursing facilities and certain 
residential care facilities (PNMI -Cs).  The remaining  group, the Nursing Facility and Residential 
Care Innovation and Quality  Advisory Council , will serve a longer -term purpose, hel ping the 
Department prioritize from among several possible initiatives to improve care over time.   
 
The Department’s work is comprehensive, addressing the full continuum from home care 
through nursin g facilit ies. If there are topics or stakeholders in this bill that are of interest but not 
adequately  represented in the Department’s work , we would be happy to discuss them with the 
Committee.  
 
The Department  would be happy to provide additional information  for the work session .  
 
Sincerely,  
Paul Saucier, Director  
Office of Aging and Disability Services  
 
 
  

 
2 
 Attachment A.   
Maine DHHS Long -term Services and Support Reform Stakeholder Groups  
 
1. Nursing Facility and Residential Care Innovation and Quality Advisory Council  
 
The purpose of the Council is to advise the department on strategies to promote innovation and 
quality in Maine’s residential and nursing facility sectors.   This group is helping DHHS identify 
priority quality of ca re and quality of life measures for consideration in alternative payment 
methods.  The group is also helping DHHS interpret and address disparities in care and outcomes 
across these sectors.  The work of the Council informs the Department’s rate reform effor ts, as 
well as broader innovation and quality initiatives such as pilot programs and targeted service  
delivery development.  The Council had its first meeting on April 26, 2023.    
 
Nursing Facility and Residential Care  
Innovation and Quality Advisory Council  
Individual  Title  Organization  
Jake Anderson  Administrator  Maine Veterans’ Homes  
Laurie Belden  Executive Director  Home Care and Hospice 
Alliance of Maine  
Ari Berman, MD  Medical director of Seal 
Rock, Gorham House & 
Pinnacle of Sanford  Northern Light Geriatrics  
Barbara Bowers RN, PhD  Professor Emerita  
 University of Wisconsin -
Madison, School of Nursing  
Maureen Carland MA, RN -BSN, 
LNHA  
 Director of Quality and      
Regulatory Affairs  Maine Health Care 
Association  
Mary Lou Ciolfi  
 Senior Program Manager  The University of Maine 
Center on Aging  
Brenda Gallant  Executive Director  Maine LTC Ombudsman 
Program  
Leo J. Delicata  Attorney  Legal Services for the 
Elderly  
Betsy Grass, RN  Director of Programs & 
Services  Alpha One Service 
Coordination Agency  
Karynlee Harrington  Executive Director  Maine Health Data 
Organization/Maine Quality 
Forum  
Deirdre Heersink D.O. C.M.D.  Medical Director  MaineGeneral 
Rehabilitation and LTC  
Maine Veterans Home 
Augusta  
LeighAnn Howard RN, DNP, CHFN  VP of Clinical Excellence 
and Community 
Partnerships  Northern Light Home Care 
& Hospice  
 
3 
 Jena Jones  Policy & Advocacy 
Manager  Maine Council on Aging  
Ruta Kadonoff  Vice President for 
Programs  Maine Health Access 
Foundation  
Richard T. Marino, Jr MD  Nursing Home Division 
Director  
Key Clinical Faculty  
Clinical Assistant 
Professor  Maine Medical Partners 
Geriatrics  
Maine Medical Center 
Geriatric Fellowship  
Tufts University School of 
Medicine  
Gail Patry, MS, RN  Senior Vice President of 
Quality Programming  Healthcentric Advisors  
Laura Tremblay  CNA  Augusta Rehab  
(Direct Care and Support 
Professional Advisory 
Council)  
Janelle Tompkins  MaineGeneral  Long Term 
Care Director / 
Administrator at the Inn 
at City Hall  MaineGeneral 
Rehabilitation & Long -
Term Care  
Judy Tupper, DHEd  Director, Population 
Health, Cutler Institute 
Practice Faculty, 
Graduate Program in 
Public Health  Muskie School of Public 
Servi ce, University of 
Southern Maine  
Megan Walton  CEO  Southern Maine Area 
Agency on Aging  
Heidi Wierman, MD, FACP  Division Director 
Geriatrics & Medical 
Director Healthy Aging  
Associate Professor  MaineHealth Geriatrics  
Tufts University School of 
Medicine  
Wanda Wilcox  Executive Director  Chase Point Assisted Living  
Drew Wyman  Executive Director  The Alzheimer’s 
Association, Maine Chapter  
 
 
  
 
4 
 2. LTSS Needs Assessment Workgroup  
 
The purpose of this workgroup is to advise DHHS on how best to identify LTSS capacity and 
service gaps by county  or other geographic area .  DHHS also seeks assistance with methods for 
modeling future needs informed by demographic trends.   This work will serve as a guide as the 
department decides how to invest in susta inable living for older adults throughout the state.   This 
workgroup will address the continuum of services, including home care, day services, assisted 
living, residential and nursing facilities.  This group held its first meeting on April 5, 2023  
 
Needs Assessment Work Group  
Individual  Title  Organization  
Gretchen Zeh Higgins  Associate Director  Maine LTC Ombudsman 
Program  
Sharon Fusco  CEO  Maine Veterans’ Homes  
Jill Carney  Director of Public Policy  The Alzheimer’s Association  
Angela Westhoff  President/ CEO  Maine Health Care Association  
Lisa Henderson  Executive Director  LeadingAge  ME & NH  
Laurie Bourgoin   Chief Nursing Officer  Home Hope and Healing  (and 
Secretary, Home Care and 
Hospice Alliance of Maine)  
Chris Beaulieu  Home Care & Nutrition 
Services Director  Aroostook Agency on Aging  
Tracy Smith  LTSS Director  Service Coordination Agency  
Christina Taylor  LTSS Manager  Alpha One  
Joy Barresi Saucier  Executive Director  Aroostook Area Agencies on 
Aging  
Jaye Martin  Executive Director  Legal Services for the Elderly  
Nem Knight  Program Coordinator  Equality Maine -Network for 
Older Adults  
Jess Maurer  Executive Director  Maine Council on Aging  
 
  
 
5 
 3. Residential and Nursing Facility Rate Setting Workgroup  
The purpose of this workgroup is to help the Department u nderstand how different payment 
models may effect providers and residents ; clarify programmatic, reimbursement, quality, and 
fiscal goals ; provide feedback on rate setting methodology options ; and identify case-mix risk 
adjustment options DHHS should consider.   This group held its first meeting on March 13, 2023.  
 
Rate Setting Work Group  
Individual  Title  Organization  
Jodi Richards  Controller  DLTC Healthcare, Inc.  
Brett Seekins  Administrator  Kennebunk Center for Health 
and Rehabilitation  
Tim Jalbert  Chief Finance Officer  The Cedars  
Phil Cyr  Administrator/Owner  Caribou Rehab and Nursing 
Center  
Israel Nachfolger  Chief Executive 
Officer/Owner  Pinnacle Group of Hudson 
Valley, LLC  
Philip Hickey  President of d'Youville 
Pavilion  Saint Mary's d'Youville 
Pavilion  
Rick Fink  Director of Reimbursement  Genesis  
Wanda Pelkey  Chief Financial Officer  First Atlantic Healthcare  
Glen Cyr  Senior Vice President of 
Finance  North Country Associates  
Rebecca Gagnon  Chief Operating Officer  Maine Veterans' Homes  
Cheryl Dobbelsteyn  Cove's Edge  Administrator/Senior Executive 
Director  
Camela Deschene  Administrator  Eastport Memorial Nursing 
Home  
Paul Arbour  Executive Director  Dirigo Pines  
Evelyn Lumbert  Administrator  MaineGeneral Rehabilitation & 
Nursing Care  
Julie Feld  Chief Financial Officer  Continuum Health Services  
Michael Tyler  Owner/ Operator  Sandy River Company  
Jonathan Roy  Administrator/Owner  Crosswinds, Ridgewood, and 
St. Joseph's Memory Care  
Gabrielle Herbig  Owner  Sweet Seniors Guest House  
David Dill  Chief Financial Officer  New Communities  
Tammy Brunetti  Principal  BerryDunn  
 
 
