/3kt’&§éhmw Senator Anne Carney 
3 State House Si6lll()I ’Z 
‘_§’ a;a2 a/ Augusta, ME 04333~0003 
Ofﬁce (.20?) 2874515 
./Ilalhe 
Sazale .@A'ahl2!Z9 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing 
LD 1660: An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste 
Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute Recycling 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, I am Anne Carney, representing Senate District 29. I am 
pleased to be with you today to introduce LD 1660: An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling 
Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not 
Constitute Recycling. T 
Plastic is virtually unavoidable in the modern world. Try as We might, it is a challenge even to 
purchase food without some type of plastic container, wrap or fastener. Most of it ends up as 
waste. We generate an estimated 242 million metric tons of plastic waste in the US every year, 
and only 5% of this plastic waste is recycled annually? The remaining 95% is incinerated, 
landﬁlled, or ends up in the environment? 
As public concern over plastic continues to grow, the Maine Legislature has passed laws to 
reduce unnecessary forms of plastic waste, like single-use plastic bags; promoting recycling of 
beverage containers; and strengthening Maine’s recycling programs. Mainers are rightfully 
proud of our steps to reduce plastic waste, and we should protect this progress. 
In the last few years, a new threat to our enviromnent related to plastic has emerged. Companies 
are promoting an unproven technology called “chemical ” or “advanced ” recycling. These 
companies claim — without any signiﬁcant evidence — that “chemical ” or “advanced ” recycling 
will help address our plastic waste crisis. 
For example, a company called Brightmark operates a facility in Indiana which they claim 
recycles plastic Waste. But 70% of the output from this facility is plastic-derived “syngas,” which 
1 
Laura Sullivan, Recycling Plastic is Practically Impossible ~ And the Problem is Getting Worse, NPR. 
(Oct. 24, 2022). Available at 
2 
Id
l
Brightmark burns onsite.3 Another 20% of the output is liquid fuel, which Brightmark ships to be 
burned offsitef ‘ The remaining 10% is a “powdery residue, ” which Brightmark landﬁlls.5 This 
same company sought to build similar facility in Georgia, and was required to demonstrate that 
its existing facilities and technologies actually resulted in plastic being recycled into new 
products.6 The company could not make the demonstration and subsequently the project was not 
built.7 
Burning plastics — either directly or indirectly though conversion into a fuel — does not constitute 
recycling according to Maine, national and international laW.8 
Companies promoting “chemical ” or “advanced ” recycling are lobbying state legislatures to pass 
laws that deregulate this technology to avoid government oversight, accountability and 
regulation. See Attachment l for a summary of the harm caused by legislation classifying these 
processes as recycling, and Attachment 2 for a chart summarizing the impact of “chemical ” or 
“advanced ” recycling legislation on waste management oversight in states where it has been 
enacted. 
In essence, the concerning legislation classiﬁes “chemical ” or “advanced ” recycling facilities as 
manufacturing facilities, even though virtually all plastic waste processed at these facilities is 
turned into gases, chemicals, tars, oils, and toxic waste that is subsequently burned. This process 
is both expensive and energy intensive.9 The end result is to exempt these facilities from state 
solid waste management laws and regulations. It allows facilities to evade the public permitting 
process, siting restrictions, reporting requirements, and operating conditions that apply to all 
solid waste facilities. 
LD 1660 will protect Maine from this type of harmful legislation by reinforcing Maine’s solid 
Waste hierarchy and accurately reﬂecting that this process and these facilities are not recycling. 
Turning speciﬁcally to the bill, LD 1660 amends Maine’s solid waste laws to accurately reﬂect 
that this ‘advanced recycling ’ process is processing and disposing solid waste and will ensure 
that our solid waste laws and regulations will apply to a proposal to develop one of these 
facilities in Maine. It does so by adding deﬁnitions of terms and processes typically used by 
“chemical ” and “advanced ” recycling facilities to the Waste Management and Solid Waste 
Management and Recycling chapters of Title 38 (chapters 13 and 24). 
3 
See, Brightmark Response to Draft Survey for Pyrolysis and Gasification Units, p. 17. (Dec. 23, 2021). 
4 
Id. 
5 
Id. 
6 
DeAnne Toto, Brightmark Scraps Plans for Georgia Plant, Recycling Today. (Apr. 12, 2022). 
7 
Id. 
8 
See 38 MRS 1303-C(22), EPA’s i997 Measuring Recycling: A Guide for State and Local Governments 
and European Union, Directive of the European Parliament on Waste and Repealing Certain Directives, 
Pub. L. No. Article 3(l7). 
9 
Andrew Rollinson & Jumoke Oladejo, Chemical Recycling: Status, Sustainability, and Environmental 
impacts, p. 23-27 (2020).
2
This bill will not prohibit a company from proposing a facility in the state. However, it makes 
clear that if a facility is proposed, the facility will be regulated like all other waste facilities and 
therefore be subject to the requirements we have created to protect Maine residents and our 
enviromnent from harm due to improper waste management. I urge you to continue Maine’s 
tradition of responsible waste management. Our laws a.nd regulations ensure that the waste we 
produce, and the facilities that manage it, are designed, sited, developed, and operated in a way 
that limits any harm to our communities and our shared environment. 
I will conclude with a suggestion that the committee consider carrying over LD 1660, to allow 
the committee to continue focusing on PFAS and allow more time to address this important issue 
in the second session. 
Thank you for your thoughtfulness and attention today. I am happy to answer any questions you 
may have. 
QMML Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
3
