 
 
 
May 8th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC testimony opposing L.D. 1660: An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are 
Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute Recycling  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources C ommittee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce . The 
Chamber is the voice of Maine business, speaking for approximately 5,000 Maine businesses of all sizes 
throughout the State. The Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in opposition to L.D. 
1660.  
 
The Chamber appreciates the effort of the Legislature and this committee to protect various communities across 
Maine as it pertains to the solid waste hierarchy. Our members are committed to protecting the environment by 
ensuring that products manufactured  are recycled properly and safely. Unfortunately, we do have some 
concerns with the proposed legislation before you today. Advanced recycling has a valid place in the plastic 
recovery value stream.  Being able to break down complex, and hard to recycle com ponents and then being able 
to recover them and use them for new products or packaging is a positive. Banning it or limiting it  would make 
it more difficult to recover already existing plastic waste , and we feel if L.D. 1660 were to pass, it could 
negative ly impact our members and how they look to the future to address recycling and packaging.  
 
Additionally, advanced recycling offers environmental benefits by remaking more used plastics into brand new 
plastics. Advanced recycling diverts plastics from landf ill and decreases greenhouse gas emissions associated 
with virgin plastic production. It also takes more of the 90% of plastics that are not recycled today and remaking 
them into new plastics. With advanced recycling technologies, more types of plastics ca n be recycled compared 
to traditional recycling technologies, including some mixed and soiled plastics. We feel advanced recycling 
creates economic opportunities by allowing used plastic to become valuable new products all while creating 
jobs and encouragi ng investment in the state. Companies all over the country are investing billions of dollars in 
these types of recycling facilities.  
 
 
 
 In closing, we have seen a strong national push across the country from both republicans and democrats to 
recognize advan ced recycling as a form of manufacturing. I believe 24 other states have adopted legislation – 
from our neighboring state of New Hampshire – to a larger state such as Illinois. We believe this would be a 
better approach for us to take rather than what is p roposed in L.D. 1660, which states that advanced recycling 
facilities are not recycling facilities for the purposes of regulating solid waste, it would subject advanced 
recycling facilities to solid waste regulations. Thank you for the opportunity to testi fy today. I am happy to try 
and answer any questions and bring back additional information for the work session if needed.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
