 
 
 
1425 K Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005  
P 202.974.5200 | plasticsindustry.org  
May 5 , 2023  
 
Joint  Environment and Natural Resources  Committee  
State House, Room 216 
Augusta M E, 04333  
 
SUBJECT: LD 1660/SP 665 – An A ct to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities  are Subject to Solid 
Waste Regulation and That Adva nced Recycling Do es Not  Cons titute Recycling   - OPPOSE  
 
Dear Chair Brenner, Chair Gramlich,  and Esteemed Members of the Joint Committee:  
 
The Plastics Industry Association (PLASTICS) is the only national trade association that supports and 
represents the entirety of the plastics supply chain, representing the 6th largest manufacturing industry and 
nearly one million workers acros s the United States. Since 1937, PLASTICS has been working to make its 
members and the industry more globally competitive while advocating for an increase in  recycling and 
sustainability. Thus, PLASTICS has a specific interest in advanced recycling technol ogies and opposes LD 
1660 /SP 665, which would prohibit advanced recycling  facilities and their technologies from being built and 
utilized in Maine . To elaborate, please consider the following:  
 
1. PLASTICS strongly supports efforts to ensure that greater amounts of our post -use 
packaging materials, especially plastics, are recycled and converted into feedstocks for new 
plastics and other useful products.   
 
Plastic materials are highly valuable materials that play an important role in the modern eco nomy. 
They provide sustainability benefits versus alternative materials and will continue to play an 
important role in helping society mitigate greenhouse gas emissions.1 Advanced recycling is a 
necessary and essential complement to mechanical and organic recycling technologies in order to 
improve the recycling rate, reduce plastic waste, and increase the amount of recycled plastic in 
commerce.  
 
2. Advanced recycling technol ogies are critical to meeting plastic recycling and recycled 
content demands.  
 
As the economy becomes more circular, there is growing demand to increase plastic recycling as 
well as recycled content in products, and advanced recycling is critical to meetin g this demand. 
Advanced recycling technologies can reduce environmental impacts associated with use of virgin 
natural resources —that is, raw material extraction, refining, and consumption —by producing fully 
circular outputs (polymers, monomers, intermediat es, and other materials).2 
 
 
1 A recent study published by PLASTICS determined that “scientific life cycle assessments of plastics and alternative materials  find that plastics tend 
to have lower carbon footprints, making them the more su stainable option among current materials in a number of applications.” See Green, Kenneth, 
Plastics and Sustainability (Oct. 2021), p.2, available at https://2z2uy32ofddf3z9ep91ninb4 -wpengine.netdna -ssl.com/wp -content/uploads/Plastics -and-
Sustainability.pdf . 
2 See Am. Plastic Makers, What is Advanced Recycling, available at https://www.plasticmakers.org/advanced -recycling/  (noting that through advanced 
recycling, “ [u]sed plastic products become new products again, keeping plastics out of our environment and reducing our need for virgin r esources”).  
 
 
 
1425 K Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005  
P 202.974.5200 | F 202.296.7005 | www.plasticsindustry.org  
3. PLASTICS encourages  Rhode Island to  recognize  the benefits  of advanced  recycling.  
 
LP 1660/SP 655  would regulate advanced recycling technologies as manufacturing facilities, which 
will enable residents of the state to recycle greater amounts and types of plastics packaging. 
Advanced recycling technologies play an important role in ensuring resources a re kept at their 
highest and best use and remain complementary to mechanical and organic recycling. 
Collaboration across the supply chain is critical to support the development of new material -to-
material pathways.  
 
Advanced recycling technologies are nece ssary and essential complement s to mechanical and organic 
recycling technologies to improve the recycling rate, reduce plastic waste, and increase the amount of 
recycled plastic in commerce. Advanced recycling converts post -use plastics into their original  building 
blocks, specialty polymers, feedstocks for new plastics, waxes and other valuable products. This process 
takes place in the absence of an oxygen. Advanced recycling is not incineration, as it is often inaccurately 
labeled. These technologies woul d help more material to be recycled, which would increase the value of 
the entire recycling system.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on this very important proposal. PLASTICS advocates for 
the responsible recycling, reuse, and recovery of al l plastics products, and while we respectfully oppose 
this measure as it is currently written, we welcome any opportunity to work with policymakers to  successfully 
grow  and improve  Maine ’s recycling sector.  
 
If I can provide any further information or answer any clarifying questions, please do not hesitate to reach 
out to me at dfortunato@plasticsindusty.org . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Danielle Fortunato  
Regional Director, State Government Affairs  
Plastics Industry Association  
 
