1 
 Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 1660 – An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject  
to Solid Waste Regulation  and That Advanced Recycling Does Not  
Constitute Recycling  
Public Hearing  
Jacquelyn Elliott ǀ May 8, 2023  
 
Honorable Senator Brenner, Chair; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and Honorable 
Committee Members:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT OF LD 16 60. My name is 
Jacquelyn Elliott and I live in Waterboro. I am presenting this testimony as a long -time 
environmental health and justice advocate who has focused on shifting waste management 
policy toward sustainable options that protect public health and th e environment; conserve 
valuable resources; and preserve disposal capacity. I am a member of DWME1 (Don’t Waste ME) 
a citizens’ group fighting for policies that actually p rotect communities from the harmful impacts  
of waste facilities . Those efforts  include support for the principles of environmental justice2 for 
all Maine’s citize ns to have agency and infl uence in the establishment of polic ies and regulation s. 
Waste is a choice we make . We can , and sho uld, choose to contribute to actual3 Zero Waste Goals 
that reduce what requires disposal; removes toxic inputs on the front end; reuses and recycles 
valuable resources; and establishes control of processing and disposal at the local level.  
 LD 1660  is foremost , a bill addressing processing plastic w aste. It is important legislation 
and provides central elements that will assist to protect the public health and environment for 
the people of Maine  from the fossil fuel and chemical  industries’ push to site fouling  “Advanced 
Recycling ” facilities . Industry is  seeking s ituations where regulations are weak and ha s been 
influencing legislation across the country. With the concentration and control by the for -profit 
waste industry in Maine and across the region, it is imperative that Maine establish an 
appropriate framewor k around such efforts lest the state  become a target for these dangerously 
despoi ling enterprises. Last year, New Hampshire passed legislation4 opening the door wide to 
this industry when it removed regulation that required  permitting and administration  as waste 
facilities.  There have been  laws passed in 22 states that weaken regulation  and oversight . 
 
1 https://dontwasteme.wordpress.com/   
2 https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice   
3 https://just -zero.org/   
4  New Hampshire General Court SB 367 relative to the regulatory status of advanced recycling and manufacturing 
facilities : 
https://www.gencourt.state.nh.us/b ill_status/legacy/bs2016/billText.aspx?sy=2022&id=2058&txtFormat=pdf&v=c
urrent  
2 
 Advanced Recycling is an overarching innocuous term for technologies that include 
gasification, pyrolysis, methanolysis, and solvolysis. Initially these technologies were marke ted 
under the heading of “Chemical Recycling ”.5 But this jargon  did not propagandize  well, thus the 
relabeling to “Advanced Recycling ”. These te chnologies all use heat and/or solvents to render 
plastics into chemical feedstock to ostensibly manufacture new plastic products. In applica tion, 
Advanced Recycling mostly involves burning with a two -step process that first melts and boils 
plastics producing gases , chemicals, tars, oils , and other toxic waste byproducts. Much of what 
results as “product ”, is burned as some form of waste -derived fu el. 
It is important to put the claims of those promoting Advanced Recycling  into the proper 
context. It is primarily a marketing and promoti onal campaign for the fossil fuel industry to enable  
the continuation of the ir ability to extract  resources and produce single -use plastics which 
ultimately end up being burned. Advances in addressing climate disruption6 have necessitated 
the fossil fuel industry  promote plastic production in their attempt to maintain profitability. Very 
little plastic can actually be recycled into high quality new, usable  products.  The Advanced 
Recycling i ndustry is looking for loos ely regu lated  opportuniti es that provide the capacity  to 
operate cheaply and with little  transparency. The industry  seeks t o be exempt from processes 
that allow for public participation in siting , permitting , and oversight . The effort  is to stage  what 
they want to do as “manu facturing ” to avoid stronger regulation as waste processing.  
Advanced Recycling efforts to locate facilities feed the cycle of envi ronmental in justice and 
racism  and perpetuate  historical , systemic  restriction s for effective citizen participation . More 
than three -quarters of these ope rations are in low -income and communi ties of color.  LD 1660 
clearly provides that Advanced R ecycling facilities and operations will be regulated  under 
Maine ’s solid waste laws  and explicates  that Advanced Recycling is in fa ct, NOT recycling . 
Breaking down plastic into toxic chemicals to then be burned, is  not recycling. Such operations 
should not be licensed  to assert products being burned are recycled. Importantly, LD 1660  codifies  
proposa ls for such faciliti es will be regulated  with notice, comment, and permitting 
requirements applicable to ALL SOLID WASTE FACILITIES .  
Than k you for considering my comments and I ask  the C ommittee VOTE OUGHT TO PASS.  
Jacquelyn Elliott  
Waterboro, ME  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
 
 
5 2020, GAIA,  (Global Initiative for Incineration Altern atives),  Chemical Recy cling: Distraction , Not Solution : 
https://www.no -burn.org/wp -content/uploads/CR -Briefing_June -2020 .pdf  
6 October 2021, Beyond Plastics, The New Coal : Plastics and Climate Change :  
https://ieefa.org/sites/default/files/2022 -09/Plastics%20are%20the%20New%20Coal%2C%20final%20version.pdf   
