 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 8th 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources 
In re: Opposing LD 1660 An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are 
Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute 
Recycling" 
We the undersigned organizations representing industries and workers across Maine 
respectfully request your opposition of LD 1660 - An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling 
Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not 
Constitute Recycling. 
We are committed to the safety of our products and to the protection of public health. We 
support Maine legislators efforts to protect it’s communities, environment and natural resources, 
however we respectfully oppose LD 1660 for the following reasons: 
This bill provides that advanced recycling technologies are not considered recycling 
facilities or recycling. ME LD 1660 prohibits advanced recycling technologies including 
pyrolysis and gasification from being considered recycling and instead links these technologies 
to the destruction of waste materials under solid waste regulation. Advanced recycling 
processes remanufacture post-use plastics back into useful products. 
Advanced recycling enables our ability to remake many “hard-to-recycle" plastics which cannot 
be recycled through mechanical recycling operations. Advanced recycling helps us decrease 
plastic waste by taking products that currently do not have strong end markets (e.g. films, 
pouches, tubes) to be converted back into their basic chemical building blocks. It supports 
continued progress toward zero waste and sustainability goals for communities and states. And 
it enables us to turn more plastics into a wide variety of new products—including highly 
regulated applications such as food-grade packaging— instead of landfilling them. 
This legislation in contrary to 24 other states that have passed legislation to properly 
classify advanced recycling facilities as manufacturing operations. Advanced recycling 
legislation has passed in 24 states that include bipartisan legislation that moved forward in 
Kansas, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Virginia. Legislation has also passed in Indiana and awaits 
the Governor’s signature.  

Democratic Governors Laura Kelly (Kansas); J. B. Pritzker (Illinois); Ralph Northam (Virginia); 
John Bel Edwards (Louisiana); Andy Beshear (Kentucky); and Gretchen Whitmer (Michigan) 
signed legislation classifying advanced recycling as manufacturing. These states recognize the 
ways that advanced recycling can contribute significantly to a circular economy wherein plastics 
are repurposed rather than disposed. 
Advanced recycling is NOT incineration. Advanced recycling converts post-use plastics into 
their original building blocks, specialty polymers, feedstocks for new plastics, waxes and other 
valuable products. This process takes place in the absence of oxygen or very little oxygen. 
Combustion requires oxygen. Incineration is the combustion or destroying of unsorted municipal 
solid waste. 
Advanced recycling facilities are subject to the federal, state and local regulatory 
authorities. A recent report  found that averaged-sized advanced recycling facilities have air 
emissions that typically are on par or lower than common industrial facilities such as food 
manufacturing and community institutions such as hospitals and universities.  
These technologies are not expected to produce dioxins and are strictly regulated and 
monitored by federal, state, and often even local air emissions authorities. Advanced 
recycling facilities are subject to the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, and state and local 
authorities. They also need to obtain operating permits from applicable states and continue to 
monitor and report various air emissions as they operate. AR facilities would also be subject to 
potential fines and closure for operational and product safety violations. State environmental 
officials have the tools they need to properly regulate the facilities. 
This legislation would close Maine to economic opportunities of advanced recycling. 
These investments have the potential to serve new markets in the coming months and years. If 
Maine became a hub for advanced recycling technologies and converted just 50% of the 
currently landfilled plastic feedstock in the state, it could generate over $78 million in economic 
output each year and up to 310 manufacturing jobs. The premise of LD 1660 therefore would 
limit Maine from benefitting from these investments and economic development opporunities 
In closing, we would like to reiterate the importance of distinguishing the conversion of everyday 
household plastic items and packaging via manufacturing processes such as pyrolysis and 
gasification from the destruction and disposal of hazardous, non-plastic waste. The processes 
which remanufacture plastics back into useful products should remain distinct from other 
processes that dispose of waste. We urge the committee to oppose LD 1660 to ensure that 
Maine ability to recycle and recover more types of plastics be protected, while simultaneously 
ensuring state leaders can protect their communities from unwanted development. 
Thank you for your consideration.  
Sincerely,  
American Chemistry Council  
American Fuels & Petrochemical Manufacturers  
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers 
Berry Global 
Braven Environmental  
Brightmark  
Consumer Brands Association  
Flexible Packaging Association  
Household and Commercial Products Association 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Plastic Energy  
Plastics Industry Association  
Printing United Alliance 
Sealed Air 
U.S. Tire Manufacturers Association 
Vinyl Siding Institute  
 
 
