 
 
  
 
May 8,  2023  
 
Honorable Chair Brenner & Members  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
RE: Berry Global, Inc. Opposition to LD 1660 - An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject to Solid 
Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recyclin g Does Not Constitute Recycling ( LD 1660)  
 
Hon. Brenner, et al:  
 
I write  on behalf of Berry Global, Inc. (Berry),1 a US-based, global manufacturer of innovative packaging and engineered 
products that make life better for people and the plane t. Berry employs over 46,000 team members  from 265 locations 
worldwide , including over 100 sites in the United States alone.  
 
I am writing to express our OPPOSITION  to LD 1660 . While we overwhe lmingly support and applaud Maine’s efforts to protect 
the safety and health of its consumers, the environment, and natural resources, identifying advanced recycling as solid waste  
is inconsistent with the  current state of technology,  ignores the market potential of advanced recycled post -consumer material, 
and will hinder Maine’s competitiveness in a fast-growing and expanding market for quality post -consumer resin  (PCR) . 
 
Traditional forms of mechanical recycling are limited in their ability to produce feedstock from PCR that is  suitable for food 
contact and other sensitive applications. Add to this that many hard -to-recycle plastics like snack wrappers, food pouches, and 
plastic toys are often not recycled at all; and we are left with large gaps in both the inputs and outputs as sociated with  existing 
waste stream and recycling infrastructure.  
 
Advanced recycling , however,  creates an opportunity  to utilize significantly more inputs and produce more suitable outputs,  
thereby eliminating landfilled waste while simultaneously  improvi ng the scope of PCR’s  use in important packaging formats  (all 
while using less energy) .2 LD 1660,  if passed, will undermine these uniquely positive  benefits of advanced recycling - benefits 
which our organization continues to support through the purchase and use of advanced recycled plastic , both here in the  
United States and abroad.3 
 
The use of PCR from advanced recycling is not a nascent, unknown concept .4 It is both economically and technologically viable . 
Advanced recycling fulfills an important , complementary function to mechanical recycling by providing an outlet for the post -
consumer plastic feedstocks that are not suitable for mechanical recycling. Meanwhile, advanced recycling is also able to 
convert the lower  quality feedstocks  into higher q uality recyclate suitable for food contact and other contact sensitive  
applications.   
                                                             
1 At Berry Global, we create innovative packaging and engineered products that make life better for people and the planet.  On March 21, 2023 , we released 
our 2022 Impact Report, underscori ng the seriousness our organization places on corporate citizenship and sustainability. To learn more, visit 
https://www.berryglobal.com/sustainability/howweperform . 
2 Studies in Europe and North America have found advanced recycling can have a lower carbon footprint than using virgin, fossil -fuel based plastic  for quality -
sensitive packaging applications . We are happy to supply references to these studies if desired.  
3 In the US, we recently announced an exciting partnership to produce drink cups for Wendy’s® using certified, advanced recycled materials , a project that 
will divert roughly 10 million pounds of hard -to-recycle plastic from landfills during its first two years . Inform ation regarding this partnership  with Wendy’s® 
is available online at https://www.berryglobal.com/en/sustainability/supporting -customer -goals/wendys -partnership . In Europe, Berry  produce s food -grade 
cream cheese tubs made from advanced recycled material s (https://packagingeurope.com/mondelz -and-berry -global -team -up-on-philadelphia -packaging -
made -from -recycled -plastic/6321.article ). In the UK , we produce food -grade packaging using 39% advanced recycled material from post -use hard -to-recycle 
films and grocery  bags. ( https://www.packworld.com/news/sustainability/article/22657371/heinz -tesco -snap -potz -feature -high -advanced -recycledcontent ). 
And w e have a similar project  with  Chovi Group , using 25% advanced recycled material for Allioli ® mayonnaise tubs. 
(https:// www.nspackaging.com/news/berry -develops -new -pot-made -from -recycled -plastic -for-chovi -group/ ).  
4 We encourage the Committee to explore government -backed investment in advanced recycling technologies in European countries that are devoted to 
eliminating landfills and doing so on a NetZero basis. A great example of this is CINEA’s continued investment in Neste’s® advanced recycling facility in 
Porvoo, Finland. ( See https://www.neste.us/releases -and-news/innovation/neste -and-cinea -sign-eu-innovation -funds -grant -agreement -chemical -recycling -
project -pulse .)  
 
Robert Flores  
robertflores@berryglobal.com  
 
 
It is for these reasons we encourage you to OPPOSE LD 1660. Should you have questions or desire a follow -up discussion, please 
feel free to reach out . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Robert Flores   
Vice President of Sustainability   
robertflores@berryglobal.com  
 
