 
◼  207-664-1700  
◼  execdirector@mrcmaine.org  
  20 Godfrey Drive, Suite 3 00◼ 
 Orono, ME 04473 ◼ 
www.mrcmaine.org  ◼ 
 
 
 
 
MRC Testimony on LD 1 660 “An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject  
to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not  Constitute Recycling  
Robert Butler  
May 4 , 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, members of the Joint Standing Committee of 
Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
My name is  Robert  Butler .  I serve  on the Board of the  Municipal Review Committee (MRC) , the 
Waldoboro Select Board, the Maine Municipal Association Executive Committee and on a number of 
local committees that focus on municipal issues.  I’m here on behalf of the MRC, its Board of 
Directors, and its Executive  Director, Michael, Carroll, who could not be here to testify because he is 
working hard to restart the waste processing plant  in Hampden.   
 
I am submitting  this testimony to express the MRC’s  opposition to LD 1 660. 
 
The MRC  is concerned  that LD1660 could  compromise the efforts of  its 115 member  communities to 
process their municipal solid waste .  Those communities  utilize diversion technolog ies that are both 
proven , safe, relatively new  and in full compliance with the National Recycli ng Policy .  
 
The MRC  does  endorse  LD 1660’s  concerns  about the impact waste management processes could 
have on the environment . However, the MRC  takes exception to the legislation’s use of the  defin ed 
terms  “Advanced Recycling” and “ Advanced Recycling Facility”  which could be construed to apply to 
MRC’s wholly  owned subsidiary , Municipal Waste Solutions (MWS)  and its processing facility in 
Hampden.    
 
MRC purchased the Hampden Plant out of receivership last August,  after an operating hiatus of  more 
than two years.  The plant had operated for 7 months prior to its shutdown in May 2020 .  Insufficient 
working capital and the impacts of COVID on  operations and  cross -border trade  were key factors 
contributing to the shutdown.    
 
Yes, the Hampden  plant was designed and built for traditional recycling, using its advanced Materials 
Recovery  Facility, or MRF, to separate merchantable cardboard, metal, mixed paper, and plastics 
from its members’ waste stre ams.  But the  Plant  was also designed to employ technologies  to 
repurpose  remaining  waste residuals into a number of merchantable products by means of processes 
LD 1660 would appear to mischaracterize as “advanced recycling”.  
 
LD 1660’s descriptive “Advanced Recycling” misses the mark .  “Repurposing” is  a far more accurate  
term and avoids confusion . “Repurposing”  conveys the idea that  saleable  products are manufactured  
from municipal solid waste. , which is what the Hampden plant does.  Repurposing embraces the 
National Recycling Policy, which embraces the idea of the circular economy .  For example,  the 
Hampden plant  diverts organics from  the waste stream to  an anaerobic digester to produce  biogas .  
The biogas  is treated  to remove carbon dioxide, moisture and other contaminants to yield  Renewable 
Natural Gas (RNG ). The RNG is compressed to a pressure that allows sale and delivery to a Bangor 
Natural Gas pipel ine located within 500 feet of the Hampden facility.   Producing biogas from organic 
MRC Maine  
 
Page 2 of 2 
 solid waste is  finding new purposes for  discarded organics  without increasing the plant’s carbon 
footprint .  We  believe the manufacture of RNG from biogas should be e ncouraged .   
 
Another example is the pulping of residual paper and natural fibers in order to repurpose the m as raw 
material for manufacture rs of pulp -derived products.  
 
But what about plastics?   The Hampden pl ant is well -positioned to incorporate technologies to 
repurpose plastics , keeping them  away  from landfills  and incinerators . 
 
A case in point is the c hemical and advanced recycling processes used to convert waste plastics into 
feedstocks for  manufacturing new products with minimal loss of material quality and quantity .  
LD1660 excludes  these processes from recycling by definition .  It’s ill -advised  to ignore or even  deny 
the science that underlies new solid waste management process es. 
 
And wh at about s mall-scale chemical, molecular and other advanced technologies to produce diesel 
fuels or home heating oil ?  They may be the most economic  and environmentally sound  options for 
diversion of plastics and other materials from landfill disposal, especially in rural areas of Maine 
where transportation costs are a huge consideration .  To limit the value of those technologies is to 
gainsay  real and potentially feasible an d available options for facilities in rural areas, such as those 
the MRC serve s. 
 
Repurposing brings science to the process of waste management and value added to the waste 
stream.  Sales  of repurposed waste augment the revenues of waste processors and pro vide a return 
on the investments of its municipal owners.  
 
The bottom line is that the MRC cannot support legislation that  would discourage development of  
real, feasible options for diver ting and repurposing waste. .  
 
MRC respectfully suggests that this committee reconsiders the waste hierarchy in light of improved waste 
management technologies and the National Recycling Polic y’s circular economy.   Is it possible that  “Reduce, 
Reuse, and Recycle” merits  an overhaul ?  Isn’t “Reduce, Reuse, Recycle and Repurpose” a more appropriate 
hierarchy , one that  reflects ongoing efforts to employ sustainable solid waste diversion technologies in 
furtherance of the National Recyclin g Policy ? 
 
The MRC  is committed to working with th is Committee to find  circular economy  solutions  to solid 
waste management  that will benefit ever y Maine resident .  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this important matter. Please do not hesitate to contact the MRC 
if you have questions or need additional information.  
