 
 
May 8, 2023 
 
Committee On Environment and Natural Resources 
Cross Building, Room 216, 287-4149 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the committee, 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1660, An Act to Provide That Advanced 
Recycling Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does 
Not Constitute Recycling.   
My name is Roger Stephenson and I serve as regional director for climate and energy advocacy 
for the Union of Concerned Scientists, a national organization with almost 3,000 Maine 
supporters. 
We do ask that you amend language that explains what recycling is not (line 2 page 2) to read, 
“Recycling” does not include energy recovery, or energy generation, or the creation of 
hazardous chemicals  by any means . 
It is my desire to point out to you three issues which argue for the need for scrutiny and 
rigorous oversight of advanced recycling facilities and operations in Maine.   
First, the technology is relatively new, still being tested, and sustained operations remain 
unproven with respect to truly recycling plastic waste.  Second, claims by those of the advanced 
recycling (AR) industry are misleading. Industry communications are replete with 
disinformation; plastics-to-fuels is not recycling anything except toxic chemicals. Third, industry 
practices are often obscure because of proprietary data and operations, therefore the lack of 
transparency can lead to misleading or missing data related to harmful emissions into our air 
and water.  
Unproven solutions to plastic waste  
Let’s start at the end, that is, downstream where plastic is collected and sorted.  90 percent is 
still landfilled.  According to a December 2022 Bloomberg report, “almost four years since the 
Alliance to End Plastic Waste launched, on-the-ground recycling is negligible compared to the 
new plastic produced by its core members, petrochemical companies”. 1 
 
1 https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2022-exxon-mobil-plastic-waste-cleanup-
greenwashing/?leadSource=uverify%20wall   

Downstream technological fixes are unproven and ineffective. According to researchers, “Proof 
of successful status (and failures) [of chemical recycling] remains largely undisclosed outside of 
laboratory trials, and for the interested party much will be found in theory but little or no 
substance given to practice”.2 
Because the technology is still being tested the risks to compliance associated with regulation 
of toxic emissions into our air and water are very real. Plastics to plastics conversion is only one 
of 8 interventions (three of which are upstream) identified in a 2020 Pew report3 that indicates 
plastic-to-plastic chemical recycling can only tackle 6 percent of plastic waste by 2040.  
Moreover, pyrolysis is currently profitable only because collection and sorting are being 
subsidized by local governments.  
Misleading claims from industry  
Most plastic in use today comes from hydrocarbons derived from crude oil, natural gas and 
coal. 
Chemical recycling includes pyrolysis and has high energy requirements, leading to carbon 
emissions that are 110 percent higher than mechanical recycling, and 9 per cent higher than 
landfilling—though 19 per cent lower than that of plastic that is incinerated.4 
The advanced recycling company Agilyx states, “ we can turn post-use plastics back into their 
original chemical components for continued use, over and over again” 5 This is misleading . 
First, plastic waste that may be recycled into new plastic is not a solution because of plastic 
degradation; the (plastic) material can be reused once, maybe twice6.    Second, the company 
further states that the plastics can be turned in to feedstocks such as naphtha or into drop-in 
fuels (jet fuel, diesel and bunker fuel); doing so is not recycling and therefore the claims that 
the technology aims to increase plastics recycling rate from 10 to 90 percent are false and 
misleading.   
Not surprisingly, the major partners of the Alliance to End Plastic Waste are petrochemical 
companies who have long recognized public dependence on plastics, and public 
misperceptions of plastics recycling are critical to their profit making .   Companies like Exxon, 
Chevron, Dow, DuPont and their lobbying and trade organizations in Washington have over the 
last few decades spent millions of dollars persuading the public that recycling plastic was viable 
 
2 Rollinson, A., Oladejo, J. (2020). Chemical Recycling: Status, Sustainability, and Environmental Impacts. Global 
Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives. doi:10.46556/ONLS4535  Available online at: www.no-burn.org/cr-technical-
assessment   
3 https://www.systemiq.earth/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/BreakingThePlasticWave_MainReport.pdf   
4 IBID 
5 https://www.agilyx.com/what-we-do/  
 
6 https://www.npr.org/2020/09/11/897692090/how-big-oil-misled-the-public-into-believing-plastic-would-be-
recycled  
even though they knew the opposite. The evidence illustrates the public deception  and 
misinformation on the part of the plastics and petrochemical industry since the late 1970s .    
Disinformation is a business model for increasing markets and profits often at the expense of 
public health and the environment.  
Lack of transparency  
When an advanced recycling company is asked to provide a life cycle analysis for one of its 
plants, and when the regulated company has sole discretion in determining the scope of the 
analysis, what we really is have the fox guarding the henhouse, and this is exactly what a 
company did with its facility in Indiana.7  In fact according to researchers, “Grossly inadequate 
reporting exists on the status of chemical recycling which, along with a lack of independent 
evidence on the technology, appears to have led to it being portrayed above and well beyond 
its capabilities. Much greater transparency  on operational performance, energy balances, and 
environmental impact assessment must be provided as standard ”.8   
Conclusion 
Absent transparency, and because of industry disinformation and because of the risks inherent 
with new technology, the protection of our air and water resources and protection of public 
health must rely on legislation specific to advanced recycling  as well as rigorous oversight and 
accountability on the part of regulatory agencies including but not necessarily limited to the 
Maine DEP.  I urge you to strengthen LD 1660 by acknowledging that chemical processes to 
convert plastic waste into hazardous chemical components and other products does not 
constitute recycling. 
 
Roger W. Stephenson, APR 
Northeast Regional Advocacy Director 
Union of Concerned Scientists 
(603) 770-9484 rstephenson@ucsusa.org   
  
The Union of Concerned Scientists puts rigorous, independent science to work to solve our 
planet's most pressing problems. Joining with people across the country, we combine technical 
analysis and effective advocacy to create innovative, practical solutions for a healthy, safe, and 
sustainable future.  www.ucsusa.org  
 
7 https://insideclimatenews.org/news/11092022/indiana-plant-pyrolysis-plastic-
recycling/?utm_source=InsideClimate+News&utm_campaign=e7c6e3c241-
&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_29c928ffb5-e7c6e3c241-329301981  
 
8 Rollinson, A., Oladejo, J. (2020). Chemical Recycling: Status, Sustainability, and Environmental Impacts. Global 
Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives. doi:10.46556/ONLS4535  Available online at: www.no-burn.org/cr-technical-
assessment  
