185 Admiral Cochrane Dr ive 
Suite 105  
Annapolis, MD 21401  
 
Tel (410) 694 -0800  
Fax (410) 694 -0900  
 
www.flexpack.org  
 
  
 
May 8,  2023  
 
Honorable Chair Brenner and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resource s 
In re: Opposing LD 1660 An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities 
Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not 
Constitute Recycling"  
 
The Flexible Packaging Association (FPA) is writing you to respectfully request your oppositio  to LD 
1660 , “An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation 
and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute Recycling “. 
 
I am Sam Schlaich, Counsel, Government Affairs of FPA, which represents flexible packaging 
manufacturers and supplie rs to the industry in the U.S. Flexible packaging represents over $39 
billion in annual sales; is the second -largest and fastest -growing segment of the packaging industry; 
and employs approximately 79,000 workers in the United States. Flexible packaging is  produced 
from paper, plastic, film, aluminum foil, or any combination of these materials, and includes bags, 
pouches, labels, liners, wraps, rollstock, and other flexible products.  
 
Thus, FPA and its members are particularly interested in solving the plastic pollution issue, 
increasing the recycling of solid waste f rom packaging, and creating a working, circular economy. 
This bill provid es that advanced recycling technologies are not considered recycling facilities or 
recycling. This will place Maine a t severe competitive  disadvantage compared to its neighbor states. 
Advanced Recycling  enables  our ability to remake many “hard -to-recycle” plastics which cannot be 
recycled through mechanical recycling ope ration s. These technologies  not only  contribute towards 
circula rity goals but create new econo mic sectors and jobs.  Lastly, we would like to point out that 
LD 1660 is contrary to the la ws of 23 states that h ave passed  legislati on correct ly classif ying 
advanced recycling fa cilities as manu facturing operations.  
 
For the above outlined reasons, FPA must remain opposed to LD 1660  in its current form and 
respectfully request an unfavorable report .  
 
In advance, thank you for your consideration. If we can provide further information or answer any 
questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at 410 -694 -0800 or SSchlaich@Flexpack.org . 
 
Respectfully,  
Sam Schlaich  
Sam H. Sc hlaich, J.D.  
Government Affairs Counsel, FP  
 
 
