Natural Resources Qouncii of Maine 
3 Wade Street a Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 Q Fax: (207) 622-4343 e www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1660, 
An Act To Provide that Advanced Recycling Facilities are Subject to Solid Waste 
Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute Recycling 
Sarah Nichols, Sustainable Maine Director, May 8, 2023 
Senator Bl‘6I1Il6l‘ , Representative Grarnlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
testify in support LD 1660. 
It is a priority for NRCM to protect the integrity of Maine’s Solid Waste Management 
Hierarchy, ‘ and we take a systemic. forward-thinking approach in the work that we do. We 
believe that it’s important for Maine’s lawmakers to send a clear message that the State does not 
place so-called “advanced recycling ” teclmologies on the same rung of the hierarchy as actual 
recycling. Recycling happens when a discarded material is used as a raw input into a new 
product or package and thereby conserves our ﬁnite natural resources for the future. However, 
“advanced recycling ” processes like pyrolysis and gasiﬁcation are misleading by design because 
they are not recycling at all, but a form of waste-to-energy, which destroys our natural resources. 
LD 1660 would aptly amend the deﬁnition of recycling to make clear that “advanced recycling ” 
does not constitute recycling in the state of Maine, which is very timely. Maine recently became 
the ﬁrst state in the nation to establish an Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for Packaging 
law, which requires packaging companies to pay fees based on the sustainability of their 
packaging. This law requires a distinction between what is “readily recyclable ” and not, the 
details of which of being worked out through a routine-technical rulemaking process by the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Manufacturers of packaging would like 
their materials to be deemed “readily recyclable ” because they will pay lower fees to the EPR 
program, and consumers feel better about purchasing goods if the packaging is considered to be 
recyclable. 
Manufacturers of plastic packaging are feeling particularly threatened because plastic is slowly 
but surely losing the social license granted to it by recycling, and the plastic industry is trying 
hard to distract us from the facts with false solutions, like “advanced recycling. ” The oil and gas 
companies that make plastic have always known that most plastic can’t and won’t be recycled 
but promoted it anyway because they know recyclability sells. The truth is that recycled plastic is 
not a valuable commodity, and it’s cheaper to just make new plastic. 
However, it’s worth mentioning that Maine’s bottle redemption law is an example of Where 
recycling Works, because those containers are largely uniform, clean, and pre-sorted, making 
recycling them into new containers possible. And minimum recycled content standards for 
plastic beverage containers, like Maine-’s, help with making the economics work. We should 
1 
hgps:5/www.maine.govfdepfsustainability/sw~l1ierarchyhtml
celebrate those successes but know that the real solution is to drastically reduce our use of single- 
use disposable plastic packaging, not redeﬁne recycling in order to make the use of plastic 
packaging more palatable. 
Further, we support how LD 1660 preemptively sends the message that any “advanced 
recycling ” facilities proposed in Maine will be held to the same environmental standards as other 
solid Waste processing facilities. Our neighboring state of New Hampshire just recently became 
the nineteenth state in the nation to regulate any new “advanced recycling ” facilities asa 
manufacturing operation so that they are subject to weaker environmental standards? 
The plastic industry has been strategic and proactive in its approach to sell people on the false 
merits of “advanced recycling ” in the United States. We urge you to join us in support of this 
equal and opposite approach to solid waste policy by voting Ought to Pass on LD 1660. 
2 
https:;’fwwW.americanchem§stt"vxotnichemisti ﬁt/>in-am=criea: ’ naws~t:'endsfni"i:<s:~;-releascZ2022fnew-hampshire» 
becomes~ l 9th~state-and- ﬁrst-in~r:ew-england-to-nass~advanced-rectacling- law
