i'~- r 
,W 
,, 1“ .11” “E ta “:1 ‘ 
=»”‘“»~:%z' 
Solutions foru 
’l°oxic~Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
in Support of LD 1660 “An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject to 
Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute Recycling" 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
May 8, 20234 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. l am the director of advocacy for Defend 
Our Health. Defend Our Health's mission is to make sure that everyone has equal access to 
safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and climate 
friendly. l am here to testify in support of 1660 "An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling 
Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not 
Constitute Recycling" . 
LD 1660 provides that advanced recycling facilities are not recycling facilities for the purposes of 
regulating solid waste. it also amends the definition of "handle" to clarify that a facility that 
converts solid waste or plastic using advanced recycling is a solid waste facility. 
industry has worked hard over the past several years to convince lawmakers and the general 
public that so-called “advanced recycling ” or “chemical recycling" is an environmentally safe 
ways to deal with waste. This couldn’t be further from the truth. Advanced recycling is justa 
fancy way of saying that they are burning the waste, and that is not safe for the environment or 
public health. LD 1660 would not allow advanced recycling facilities to be labeled as recycling 
facilities, a much-needed step to protect the health and environment of all Mainers.' 
Burning waste, as when using advanced recycling processes, can create hazardous waste. 
Using advanced recycling processes to manage plastic waste creates toxic chemicals such as 
phthalates and BPA, which are carcinogens and can cause respitory and neurological issues. 
And, of particular concern here in Maine, using advanced recycling can release toxic PFAS into 
the environment. PFAS are highly mobile, and burning does not fully destroy these toxic 
chemicals. instead, this type of disposal just ends up returning either the same chemical, ora 
byproduct of PFAS to end up in the air where they can travel for great distances ‘. 
In 2019, Congress directed the Department of Defense (DOD) to incinerate PFAS waste such 
as aqueous film forming firefighting foam (AFFF) but it is unclear at what temperature PFAS is 
1 
Stoiber, T., & Evans, S. (2020, July 11). Disposal of products and materials containing per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS): A cyclical problem. Science Direct. Retrieved May 7, 2023, from 
https://wvvw.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0045653520318543'?via%3Dihub 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 699-5795 l info@defendourhealth.org l defendourliealtlmorg
actually destroyed, if it is destroyed at all during incineration. Research is still ongoning. 
Because incineration is not successful in destroying PFAS, in 2022 Congress reversed course 
and put language in the 2022 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) requiring the DOD to 
stop using chemical recycling to dispose of aqueous film forming firefighting foam (AFFF) due to 
the dangers of PFAS getting out into the air and drinking water. 
Any perceived beneﬁts from advanced recycling are far outweighed by the dangers to the health 
and environment of Mainers. We should not allow this industry-driven attempt at greenwashing 
incineration to be allowed in the state. Therefore, we urge the committee to vote “ought to pass” 
on LD 1660. We do have one suggested amendment to the definition of recycling, which we 
would urge the committee to adopt. The language is below. 
Suggested amendment language. 
“Recycling ” does not include energy recovery or energy generation by any means, including but 
not limited to advanced recycling, chemical recycling, combustion, gasification, incineration, 
pyrolysis, solvolysis, thermal desorption, waste-to-energy, waste-to-fuel, or any other chemical 
or molecular conversion process. lt also does not include landfill disposal of discarded material 
or discarded product component materials, including the use of materials as landﬁll cover. 
That’s because the limitation on the technologies is limited to the purposes highlighted. If it is 
used for a different purpose, than there is no limitation. We would modify it as follows: 
“Recycling ” does not include energy recovery, or energy generation, or the creation of 
hazardous chemicals by any means, including but not limited to advanced recycling, chemical 
recycling, combustion, gasification, incineration, pyrolysis, solvolysis, thermal desorption, waste- 
to-energy, waste-to-fuel, or any other chemical or molecular conversion process. lt also does 
not include landfill disposal of discarded material or discarded product component materials, 
including the use of materials as landfill cover. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 6996795 I info@delencidurliealtlicrg I defendourltealtlmrg
