Terry Grill
Sealed Air Corporation
LD 1660
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
Re: Opposing LD 1660: An Act to Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are 
Subject to Solid Waste Regulation and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute
Recycling"
SEE Corporation respectfully requests your opposition to LD 1660 - An Act to 
Provide That Advanced Recycling Facilities Are Subject to Solid Waste Regulation 
and That Advanced Recycling Does Not Constitute Recycling.
SEE provides packaging materials that are essential to the safety and quality of food, 
especially protein, sold into the state of Maine.  We are committed to the safety of our
products and to the protection of public health. We support efforts to protect Maine’s 
communities, environment and natural resources, however we respectfully oppose LD
1660 for the following reasons:
This bill provides that advanced recycling technologies are not considered recycling 
facilities or recycling. ME LD 1660 prohibits advanced recycling technologies 
including pyrolysis and gasification from being considered recycling and instead links
these technologies to the destruction of waste materials under solid waste regulation. 
Advanced recycling processes remanufacture post-use plastics back into useful 
products.
Advanced recycling enables our ability to remake high performance, food contact 
plastic film packaging which cannot be recycled through mechanical recycling 
operations. Advanced recycling helps us decrease plastic waste by converting even 
food contaminated packaging back into basic chemical building blocks and it enables 
us to include recycled content in highly regulated food-grade packaging— instead of 
landfilling them.
Advanced recycling is NOT incineration. Advanced recycling facilities are subject to 
the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, and state and local authorities. They also 
need to obtain operating permits from applicable states and continue to monitor and 
report various air emissions as they operate. State environmental officials have the 
tools they need to properly regulate the facilities.
We ask that you not stand in the way of recycling food contact packaging nor the use 
of recycled content in food packaging.  Please oppose LD 1660.
Sincerely,
Terry Grill
Advocacy

