April 13th, 2023 
To: Members of the Joint Committee of Taxation 
Re: LD 1075 An Act to Promote Economic Growth Through Increased Film Incentives 
My name is Bodhi Ouellette. I am a resident of South Portland, Maine, and lwork in the film 
industry as a Camera Assistant, Videographer, and listed on the IATSE Local 481's Overhire list 
as an Electrician. I support the passage of LD 1075. 
While I have always wanted to get into the filmmaking industry since l was seven years old,l 
had thought that I would need to seek education in film out of state, whether staying in New 
England like Boston, east coast such as New York City, or find myself in Hollywood. Back in 
2015, I was convinced by a teacher from Portland Arts & Technology High School to research 
the programs held at Southern Maine Community College for their Communications & New 
Media. One visit to an Open House convinced me immediately to enroll. That ended up being 
one of the best decisions I made My time at SMCC was instrumental in the education, 
experience, and connections l‘ve created with many fellow local filmmakers. 
Maine's industry has steadily grown within the last five to ten years, since I began workin in the 
area in the summer of 2018, and unfortunately, the work that has come into our state hasn’t yet 
caught up with the ever growing workforce of filmmakers who have chosen to make Maine their 
home. Rather, l and many others, have sought to seek work outside of the state, primarily to 
Massachusetts, where the industry has flourished with countless high budget television shows 
and blockbusters, and Academy Award winning films who chose to shoot their films in that state. 
And while there have been many documentary, or reality shows that have shot in this state, 
such as Maine Cabin Masters, or The Lost Kitchen, those usually have much smaller crews 
attached to them, and many times, crew that are hired out of state to work these one-to-two day 
or longer shows. 
I have lived in Maine my whole live, and I've always had the ambition to enter this industry thatI 
fell in love with as a child. And I want to stay and keep contributing with this strong community of 
talented and passionate individuals and collaborators who are the reason why this industry in 
Maine is as strong as it is, and fuels its ever continuing growth. But we need help to bring more 
work and business to come to this amazing state. 
Thank you for taking the time to read through this testimonial. I hope through mine, and many 
other voices shared that you will consider to vote "Ought to Pass" on this legislation. 
Bodhi T. Ouellette 
South Portland, ME
