           
 
 
One Canal Plaza, Suite 500 
Portland, ME  04101 
April 11, 2023 
 
Taxation Committee 
Maine State Legislature 
 
RE:  LD 1075 – An Act to Promote Economic Growth Through Increased Film Incentives 
 
To whom it may concern: 
 
My name is Drew Sigfridson.  I am a Senior Partner at The Boulos Company, a full-service 
commercial real estate company in Northern New England.  I am also a board member with Maine 
& Company and have been involved in commercial real estate development and economic 
development in Maine since 1999.  I am writing today to express my support for LD 1075. 
 
I have had the pleasure of developing business relationships and friendships with people within the 
film industry who have relocated to Maine and are looking to grow the film industry’s presence in 
our State.  These individuals, namely Xander Berkeley, Sarah Clarke, Molly Conners of Phiphen 
Studios, Matthew Delameter (homegrown talent), among many others, have demonstrated a sincere 
interest and willingness to invest in Maine, focus their businesses here and they are striving to bring 
more filmmaking to the State of Maine.  There is sincere interest in doing projects here, but 
unfortunately the tax incentives in other states put Maine at a competitive disadvantage and we 
don’t get the business.   
 
This proposed legislation would help level the playing field and put Maine on the map for attracting 
(and retaining) high paying, creative, artistic jobs in Maine.  We have a talented tailor-made 
workforce in our arts and design colleges, our technical schools and carpentry programs for set 
design and construction, and the most magical natural back drop opportunities everywhere you 
look.  Personally, I have witnessed Sarah and Xander’s appreciation for old architecture as they 
have renovated and restored many buildings in rural Western Maine that were falling into disrepair.  
From a preservation perspective, there are so many opportunities (and desperate need) for 
investment in rural towns that could benefit from a new perspective and revitalized use that a film 
and media presence could provide. 
 
In addition, this proposal aligns with the State’s current economic plan which aims to diversify 
Maine’s economy, attract and retain young talent to stay in our State and to modernize Maine’s 
economy in a diversity of industries.  We are very fortunate to have so many people who love our 
State and want to help improve our economy.  If we can provide this industry with the tools to work 
here, the overall economic impact and tax-generation will be significant for years to come.  When 
considering this opportunity for the State of Maine, I think we should ask ourselves:  How many 
more Steven King movies set in Maine should be filmed in Massachusetts or Connecticut? 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Drew Sigfridson 
