
Maine State Legislature Committee on Taxation 
April 11, 2023 
Page2 
Maine's educational institutions, such as SMCC, USM, UMaine, MidMaine Technical 
Center, and others, already produce accomplished graduates in media/technology ﬁelds 
with few opportunities to work in-state. Improved incentives can change that, helping 
retain homegrown talent. 
Many members of Maine's media-making community, professionals with national and 
international reputations, choose to live here but have to work elsewhere. improved 
incentives can change that, bringing out-of-state production to Maine and the attendant 
economic multiplier effects. 
There's a growing need for media-making capacity in-state. Maine's business community 
too often goes out of state when it needs media services. The State of Maine is one 
example, as are political candidates, manufacturers, retailers, and others. Improved 
incentives can change that, creating greater opportunities for local media-makers and 
further economic stimulus to the state. 
While the recent OPEGA Report confirms the absolute need for extensive changes to the 
state's administration of the existing incentive program, this should not in any way 
diminish the goal to improve incentives. Problems at the state level can be fixed; the 
Maine Film Office can be overhauled, the use of those resources managed efficiently, and 
the resurrection of the Maine Film Commission handled in a way that results ina 
professional, effective, and impactful entity that can help guide the state's role in 
media-making matters going forward. 
We urge the Taxation Committee to support LD 1075 and urge the Maine Revenue 
Services, and the Maine Legislature to adopt new media production tax incentives. 
Sincerely, 
Board of Directors 
Maine Film Association 
Emma Gregg, President; P3, Director of Productions 
Geoff Leighton, Past President; Producer/Director, Leighton Images 
Kyle Walton, Treasurer; Free Lance Producer, Discovery Networks 
Patrick Bonsant, Saco River Community Media Center 
Ian Carlson, Filmmaker 
Kyle Lamont, Founder/Director, Good to Go Studios 
Corey Norman, Bonfire Films 
Mike Perrault, Executive Director, Maine Film Center 
Louise Fiosen, Managing Director, Louise Fiosen, Ltd. 
516 Congress Street, Portland, ME 04101 - 
mainefilm.org - 
info@mainefilm.org
