April 10 , 2023  
To: Members of the Joint Committee on Taxation  
Re: LD 1075 An Act to Promote Economic Growth Through Increased Film Incentives  
 
My name is Jim Boutin. I am a resident of Hollis Maine. I currently work as a natural history and 
documentary camera person  and have spent a large portion of my career  providing technology for the 
film industry . I support the passage of  LD 1075 .  
As reported by the Maine Film Association in conjunction  with Dr. Todd Gabe  of the University of Maine  
the current film production busin ess in the state contributes $64 million  to the local economy. This 
legislation  gives  us the ability to energize  this nascent  Maine  indus try and invest in  an environmentally  
clean , growth oriented sector.  Films using Maine as a location are opportunities  to market the state ’s 
beautiful scenery and its people , further promoting the  tourism industry .  
The state currently has  feeder institutions that are training young people . Southern Maine Community 
College, University of Southern Main e, Maine College  of Art  and others  offer courses  and degrees in 
related fields . Efforts like the R oux Institute could also invest in  the q uickly advancing  visual  technology  
that now drives the film business. Stimulating a strong film production economy will help keep our 
young educated here in the state.  
There are currently  many national and international level actors, producers, production staff and post 
production skilled individuals that have chosen  to live in Maine for lifestyle reasons. Their work currently 
takes them out of the state. Building a strong and well-funded  production  environment would allow 
them to work in  state  bolstering our local capabilities . Additionally they would serve as mentors to local 
student and graduates helping to further build the industry.  
The film production industry is changing quickly. The migration of conten t to streaming providers has 
created a surge in quality smaller bu dget productions. Maine could easily capitalize in this growth area 
by offering appropriate film incentives. This current bill is well targeted to  stimulate growth in this area 
and bring production investments into the state.  
Thank you for taking the time to review this testimony. I hope you will consider  voting an “Ought  to 
Pass” on this legislation.  
 
Jim Boutin  
Hollis, ME  
 
