Berg, Benjamin 
From: Louise Rosen <lrosenltd@gmail.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, April 11, 2023 11:58 AM 
To: TAX 
Subject: Statement in support of LD 1075 
This inessage originates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Committee on Taxation 
clo Legislative information Office 
Clerk, Benjamin Berry 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
TAX@leqislature.maine.gov 
Statement in support of LD 1075 
I began work in the film world as the Director of International Sales and Coproductions 
at WGBH Boston, the largest producing station in the PBS system. I've had my own 
business raising finance for and distributing films for over thirty years, at different times 
based in Boston, Los Angeles, and London, and for the last almost eighteen years, in 
Brunswick, Maine. I came here originally because my father had retired here, andI 
wanted to be nearby. 
I currently serve on the Board of Directors of the Maine Film Association and Chair the 
Advocacy Committee. I've also served on the Boards of Women In Film & Video/New 
England, the Maine Media Workshops, and the Camden International Film Festival. I 
tutor filmmakers in international training programs, am a speaker and moderator on 
panels and at conferences, and have been involved with Oscar and Emmy Award- 
winning films, and films that have been selected for the world's most important film 
festivals, such as Sundance, Berlin, and Toronto. 
From all these perspectives, I am able to form a professional opinion about the role that 
improved tax incentives could play in further developing Maine's media-making sector. 
Maine has produced a wealth of aspiring media-making talent, but as much as they 
would like to, the limited opportunity here means they are unable to advance their 
careers within the state. Maine's quality of life has attracted a wealth of talent, but many 
have to work elsewhere. Even if they are enhanced to the levels proposed in the new 
legislation, Maine's incentives won't compete dollar-for-dollar with the aggressive 
programs offered in some other states. But a combination of improved incentives, 
Maine's many unique qualities, and an expanding community of media professionals can 
nonetheless attract productions that would bring benefit to the state in many forms. This 
would include the economic multiplier impact across many business sectors, the 
opportunities for aspiring talent, and more consistent work at home for locally-based 
high-level professionals. Improved incentives would be a boon for Maine.
1
Please refer to the Maine Film Association's Economic Impact Survey conducted by 
Professor Todd Gabe at the University of Maine. Better incentives could significantly 
boost the 2019 local impact of $64.3 million from an industry that globally is expected to 
reach $2,371.64 billion in 2023 at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.0%. 
Thank you in advance for supporting LD 1075.
1 
Sincerely, 
Louise Rosen 
Documentary film editorial/business consultant, producer 81 sales agent 
+1 617 899 6629 
www.louiserosenltd.com 
From the /and of the Wabanaki Confederacy
2
