Lucas StClair
Falmouth 
LD 1075
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation:
I am writing in support of LD 1075 “An Act to Promote Economic Growth Through 
Increased Film Incentives.”
Maine is currently exploring new ways to diversify and modernize its economy, as 
outlined in the Governor’s 10-Year Development Strategy. One of the simplest, and 
often most overlooked ways is through the growth of local film and media making.  
First and foremost, Maine is the most beautiful place to set a film. Its landscapes, 
natural resources, and people make the state the perfect backdrop and even character 
in films. Maine has also been host to some of the most compelling stories and hosts 
some of the most interesting and well known writers and filmmakers who long to set 
their films here. 
Film, television and media making is a low carbon footprint, value-added industry 
that straddles a wide variety of sectors, including tourism, construction, food & 
hospitality and tech, to name a few. There are upwards of 150 to 200 jobs available on
a movie set, for example, a number of them entry level. This can be exciting, enticing,
and sometimes high-paying work with benefits. These are jobs that could be occupied
by Mainers, whether they be seasonal workers looking to supplement their income, or 
recent college graduates embarking on a new career. Productions also rely on local 
vendors for a variety of needs, sometimes for months at a time. In fact, a visual media
production could be considered a temporary, independent small business, pumping 
money into the surrounding economy and offering employment opportunities. 
Maine’s current incentive program is considered one of the least successful in the 
country. LD 1075 proposes increasing those incentives, making the state more 
competitive, accelerating the growth of the industry, and opening up new avenues of 
investment. LD 1075 also builds in a number of new protectionisms that would ensure
keeping the most dollars in state, expand ROI, and narrow the focus on putting 
Mainers to work. 
Please vote “Ought to Pass” when considering LD 1075. Thank you. 
Sincerely, 
Lucas St. Clair Falmouth, Maine

