Mariah Bergeron
Biddeford
LD 1075
My name is Mariah Bergeron from Biddeford, and I work full time in the media 
world here in Maine and elsewhere. 
I pivoted my occupation during the pandemic from over a decade of bartending in 
Portland, to film and commercial work across Maine. 
The majority of my work is in the art department - art direction, props, wardrobe, set 
dressing, etc, though I also work as an actor on-screen and for voice. 
Some of my income comes from commercial work that shoots on location here in 
Maine, which has allowed me to subsidize participating the lesser-paying and less 
available narrative film and television work that occasionally comes up to the state. 
Through the connections made on those narrative sets, I've been brought to other 
states to work on projects with bigger names, and bigger budgets, getting to do the 
work I'm most interested in making on a rate that I can afford to take.
It is the work in those other states that grants me the most job leverage. 
Namedropping, budget-talk, and sentences that start obnoxiously with  "In New 
York..." get my foot in a lot more doors.
On those sets, when I get to say I'm from Maine, folks always get a glow about them. 
On one project, executive produced by John Leguizamo, actor Robert Burke 
reminisced about his time in Camden in 1996's adaptation of Stephen King's 
"Thinner." "The Wire"'s Isaiah Whitlock Jr talked of his love for L.L. Bean in 
Freeport, and going fishing with friends. On another project, Richard Kind spoke of 
his love for the Ogunquit Playhouse, but regretted not having any opportunities to 
film in Maine.
A lot of my specific work involves money and budgets. It's my job to make the right 
look and feel for each project, within the parameters given. Those parameters, in 
general, are the budget and the timeframe. On low or no-budget jobs, items are 
purchased from big box stores and promptly returned for full value. An economic 
zero, or loss. 
When a project has the ability to provide a reasonable budget, those items are 
generally sourced and purchased locally. 
Aesthetically speaking, buying locally allows for less generic and more authentic 
props and set dressing. Strategically, there isn't time once a shoot gets going to rent 
and ship, say, a couch from an out-of-state props warehouse. I buy from local stores 
and local folks, off Craigslist and Uncle Henry's - anywhere I can access items 
quickly and directly. That money goes directly to my fellow Mainers.
Any items I can keep after a shoot get put into my props stock and rented for future 
projects, which adds to my potential income and the stockpile of available on-hand 
props in the state.
The list is long of how money from production sets gets into states' economies. We're 
all aware of how great food catapulted Maine onto the center stage, and local small 
business food has fed every set I've ever been on here. If the location is too far for 
folks to drive home safely, I get put up for the night and live like a tourist. Consider 
that every production is like a huge family of tourists, who have the same basic needs,
and then a ton of other budgetary necessities, which means spending money locally.
I notice every time Patrick Dempsey or Anna Kendrick is highlighted in a Maine 
magazine for the promotion of one thing or another. Film festivals, including MIFF 
and CIFF, expand every year, drawing more attendees and celebrities to those towns, 
which those towns in turn leverage for their own marketing. Just the name "Stephen 
King" is a swirling economy of it's own, and every adaptation produced somewhere 
else feels like a sad disservice, as well as a missed opportunity. 
Working in this field has not only brought more satisfaction and excitement into my 
life, it's brought me out of the low-income bracket and into a more financially stable 
position, especially - unfortunately -  when I'm able to work on those larger 
out-of-state jobs.  
If more film work happened here, those coveted bigger names, with bigger budgets, 
would keep me and my work in state, and allow me to hire locally for art department 
teams. 
And if Maine is looking to retain it's younger workforce, give them a reason not to 
move to Los Angeles or New York. Give them a job opportunity right here. 

