Kane-Lewis 
Productions 
189 Rope Ferry Road  Sedgwick, ME  04676 207-359-2320 
www.truthtellersfilm.com   kanelewisproductions@gmail.com  
 
April 13, 2023 
 
Maine State Legislature 
Taxation Committee 
 
RE:  LD 1075 - An Act to Promote Economic Growth Through Increased Film Incentives  
  
Dear Committee: 
 
I’m Richard Kane, film producer in Sedgwick, Maine. I served for ten years as the chair of the Maine Film 
Association and have produced a series of films about Maine artists called MAINE MASTERS sponsored 
by the Union of Maine Visual Artists and broadcast on Maine Public.  Our latest film, TRUTH TELLERS, 
will be seen on Public Television stations nationwide in 2024.   
 
I am writing in support of increasing the tax incentives awarded to film productions to help kickstart this 
potentially lucrative industry in Maine.  As an industry, we have struggled to keep our young people at 
home who flee to other industry locations like Massachusettes, California, Louisiana, Georgia, and New 
York where they can make a decent living due to those states film tax incentives.  They can’t do so in 
Maine in spite of the fact that we boast some of the most beautiful coastline, forests and mountains.  
My son Jacob Kane has been living in Brooklyn, NY for ten years, carrying on a successful career as a 
dolly grip. More than anything he would love to live in Maine but cannot make a living here.  He worked 
on Martin Scorcese’s Shutter Island in Acadia National Park.  But not since then did Scorcese produce in 
Maine.  Jacob continues to work with him and many others in New York.  
 
Jonathan Frakes, a highly successful actor and director of the Star Trek series, lived in Belfast, Maine, but 
couldn’t stay here as the industry was attracted to those states with tax incentives. 
 
Once tax incentives are established in a state, the film business grows.  However it is not only the film 
workers, it is all the ancillary businesses that thrive:  hardware stores, hotels, restaurants, boat and car 
rental agencies, so many more businesses generating economic activity that in turn produces more tax 
revenue. 
 
Although we recognize that there are other ways a legislature can attract business to its state, “it is hard 
to ignore the success a state like Georgia  has had in attracting new film projects with a tax credit 
program estimated to cost over $1 billion  in fiscal year 2023,” National Conference of State Legislatures 
reported. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Richard Kane 
