Sean Slaughter
Portland
LD 1075
My name is Sean Slaughter and I am a Production Sound Mixer, Sound Editor, 
Screenwriter, Producer, Director and Editor. I absolutely love what I do for work. I 
also absolutely love living in Maine. Unfortunately, I don't really get to work on many
Film or TV projects here in Maine. I travel for that, mostly to Massachusetts. 
Massachusetts has a very competitive Media Tax Incentive. In fact, it's so competitive
that the film and television production industry there is booming. Personally, I made 
the most income in one year in 2022 than I ever have in my life and the majority of 
that income came from working in states other than Maine. I personally see the huge 
financial benefits that offering a Media Tax Incentive has given the state of 
Massachusetts and I really sincerely hope that Maine follows this example. There are 
a great number of Maine based film industry crew and employees who feel the same 
as I. We all want Maine to entice film makers to choose locations in our great and 
beautiful state to shoot their movies, television shows, reality shows, advertisements 
and corporate videos. If Maine does the right thing, we are talking literally tens to 
hundreds of millions of dollars annually in film budgets that will be spent here within 
our borders. When a major motion picture with big funding comes to town, local 
economies see a robust and immediate increase in revenue at restaurants, hotels, 
lumber yards, hardware stores, craft stores and clothing stores. Residents of Maine 
who would work on the crew would also see a sizable addition to their yearly 
incomes. The tertiary spending that comes from the producers of the film, and the 
crew are a solid gain for any local economy where these production companies film 
and create. The trial period for the Incentive Program has been so successful in 
Massachusetts that the state government made it permanent. I implore you all in the 
Taxation Committee to do everything you can to help and pass a similar Incentive 
Plan here in Maine. If we don't adopt one, we are losing literally hundreds of millions 
of dollars in possible yearly revenue and well paying and regular employment for all 
the local crew members who reside here, but travel elsewhere to work. 
Thank You 
Sean Slaughter
Portland Maine 
