TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 1807 
”An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
WildIife's Report on Boater Safety Education" 
Reported by: Representative LANDRY of Farmington 
DATE OF HEARING: May 8, 2023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee. I am Game Warden Lt. Jason Luce speaking on behalf of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife, in support of L.D. 1807. 
I would like to provide some background and context on how this bill came to fruition. In 2021 during 
the 1“ Regular Session of the 130"‘ Legislature "L.D. 1663 An Act To Improve Boating Safety on Maine 
Waters" , sponsored by Representative Jessica Fay was introduced to the IFW committee. This was 
carried over to the 2"“ Session and IFW provided a report back. 
The bill passed and became PUBLIC LAW 2022 CHAPTER 656,_”_in 2022 but has a delayed implementation 
date of January 1, 2024. As part of the law, the IFW committee required a stakeholder group be formed 
with a goal of reporting back on its proposals in 2023. The focus of the group was to discuss how 
mandatory boater education should be implemented in Maine. 
The stakeholder group brought representatives from the marine trades, a sporting association, the 
Department of Marine Resources, the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, the National 
Association of State Boating Law Administrators, a legislator, a lake water quality association, a summer 
camp representative, and a marina/boat dealer/rental agent. 
During the stakeholder process 6 meetings were held from 6/29/22 to 12/5/22. Though the members of 
the stakeholder group didn't always share the same opinion on each topic discussed, consensus on the 
proposals put forth to this Committee were supported by the majority. The collective recommendations 
of the stakeholder group include statutory changes, policy changes and educational outreach. 
This bill proposes statutory changes based on the recommendations included in the report back by the 
mandatory boater education stakeholder group. The committee heard the Department's review of the 
report back that was given on behalf of the stakeholder group on March 22, 2023.
Section 1 and Section 3 of the bill allow the option of an equivalency exam that will be offered by IFW. 
The group recommended that lFW offer an equivalency exam so that if someone would prefer to test 
out of the full boater education course they can choose to do so. Persons who choose not to take the 
full course may prepare in various ways including studying the boater education student manual, they 
may have previous experience on the water, they may utilize the lFW website online materials or may 
have taken a boating course that isn't NASBLA approved. This provides an option to become certified 
without taking a full NASBLA course. 
Section 2 of the bill define "Recreational Boating" . The group discussed defining commercial boating 
and/or recreational boating. The decision was made to propose defining recreational boating and use 
similar language as found within the Code of Federal Regulations. They felt it would automatically 
exempt boaters who were fishing commercially which is what DMR had asked for. 
Section 4 of the bill replaces "operate a motorboat" with ”or motorboats other than for recreational 
purposes" . It was proposed and agreed upon by the group that the language “other than for 
recreational purposes" should be written in statute every time it states, "operate a motorboat" so it is 
clear that whether you are on inland or tidal waters the boater education requirement is only when the 
boat is being used recreationally. 
Section 6 of the bill adds the following exemptions to the requirement to complete a boater safety 
education course: 
1. Modifies the description of the type of maritime license that can be exempt from the boater 
education course requirement. The group had discussions about the appropriate title for the 
maritime license that is exempt and wanted clearer language so a proposal to use Coast Guard 
language was put forth. 
2. Creates a boater education course exemption for customers trying a boat with a boat dealer. 
The group asked that a statutory proposal be included in the report back, allowing anyone who 
wants to try a boat to possibly purchase from a dealer, be exempt from the course requirement. 
3. The group agreed to propose to allow boat rental agents to be able to offer a temporary 
boating safety course that would allow the renter to operate the boat for up to 14 days from 
the date the course was complete or for the duration of the rental agreement. 
4. Including boaters on territorial waters to have a boater safety course. Department of Marine 
Resources supported requiring the NASBLA approved course on territorial waters if the boat was 
being operated for recreational purposes. 
5. Boater education course exemption for transient boaters/foreign vessels who come into 
Maine waters. The group discussed transient boaters/foreign vessels who come into Maine 
waters by sea, being exempt completely or being exempt for up to 60 days. After great debate 
and validating that Canada's boaters are required to take a course that is NASBLA approved, the 
group decided to propose that someone ”wh0 is not a citizen of the United States, arriving by 
sea and is temporarily using Maine's territorial waters as defined within §600l for 60 days or 
fess" could operate without proof of a NASBLA approved course. The group decided against 
proposing any exemption for inland waters for nonresident boaters who arrive by land. The 
Canadian Pleasure Craft Certification that is required in Canada is NASBLA certified/recognized. 
See section 4.1 for confirmation of this at the link below:
https:[/tc.canada.ca/en/corporate-services/consultations[public-consultation-modernizingjaleasur G 
craft-operator-competencv;program/fee-proposaI-pleasure-craft-operator-competenqgprogram 
6. There was a lot of discussion amongst the stakeholder members about changing the born- 
after-date. The group discussed their differences of opinion on keeping the current born after 
date vs. increasing the age required to take the course which would encompass more of the 
boaters who statistically cause accidents. 
Though final majority vote by the group did not recommend a change the age requirement for 
mandatory boater education it is something the committee can discuss. Here was the breakdown on 
the VOTE: 5 out of 9 voted to keep the born after date the same, 4 out of the 9 voted to either require 
all ages take the course or take it up to a certain age (ex: up to 55 years old). 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
