 
            STATE OF MAINE  
          HARBOR MASTER’S  
                ASSOCIATION  
                                             Incorporated 1983  
  
 
William Owen – President  
Daryen Granata  – Vice President  
Shawn Hebert – Treasurer  
Gary Pagel – Secretary  Wayne Hamilton – Board of Directors  
Jay Clement – Board of Directors  
Paul Plum mer – Board of Directors  
Charles  Tetreau – Board of Directors  
Chris Wharff - Board of Directors   
 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1807, An Act to Implement the Recommendation of the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife’s Report on Boater Safety Education.  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry and honorable members of joint standing committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, this testimony before you today regarding LD 1807, An Act to Implement 
the Recommendation of the Department of inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s Repor t on Boater Safety 
Education is being submitted on behalf of the Maine Harbor Master’s Association.  
The Maine Harbormasters Association represents over 140 municipalities statewide, which include 
inland and coastal waters.  Our municipal officials see fir sthand the need for basic boating safety courses 
and are fully supportive of LD 1807.  
The Association would like to address our concerns with the temporary boater safety courses provided 
by rental agents.  The main concern is the language pertaining to the  14-day temporary rental 
certification.  The Association feels with the growing number of short term rental property opportunities 
statewide, individuals who rent are within the higher percentage of users than in years past. The 
Association believes that t hese are high risk groups who need a true boating safety and education 
course. Residents of Maine who spend countless hours learning their local inland and coastal waters 
obtaining the local knowledge how to safely operate their vessel. It would be unjust to assume a boat 
rental –safety course is sufficient enough to entrust someone with little boating knowledge, to safely 
navigate our Maine waterways.  The Association respectfully asks that this be taken into consideration 
when implementing  Sec. 6. 12 MRSA  §13068 -A, sub -§17, ¶C,4 . 
The Association is also concerned with the verbiage of Sec. 7. 12 MRSA §13071 -A, sub -§6. The 
Association proposes that anyone found guilty of violating this chapter, would be mandated to take a 
full water safety education course before being authorized to operate a motorboat on Maine’s inland 
and coastal waters. The Association believes that  allowing a person to take a brief rental class after 
violating this section sets a bad precedent about how local and state officials take the safety of our 
Maine waters.  
 
Lastly, the Association has discussed the issue of where the boating safety course certification will be 
listed and maintained. Our recommendation is to have the certification and other licenses be 
consolidated and documented through the MOSES database.  This would allow viewing privileges by 
participating agencies such as Harbor Master’ s, Marine Patrol, Game Wardens and any local PD or 
Sheriff’s Office with boat enforcement capabilities.  
Members of the joint standing committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife, the Maine Harbor Master’s 
Association greatly appreciates your time and conside ration into this matter and is happy to field any 
questions that you may have directly related to the duties of Maine Harbor Master’s.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
William Owen  
President  
Maine Harbor Master’s Association  
 
 
 
