Maine Human Rights Commission 
Q # 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0051 
. . . 
Physical l0CFli‘l01’l.' 19 Umon Sheet, Augusta, ME 04330 
Phone (207) 624-6290 I Fax (207) 624-8729 I TTY: Maine Relay 711 
www.nzaine.g0v[mhrc 
Amy M. Sneirson Barbara Archer Hirsch 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR COMMISSION COUNSEL 
March 21, 2023 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Matthew Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: An Act to Amend the Maine Human Rights Act Regarding Right-to-Sue Letters, LD 1001 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
The Maine Human Rights Commission ("Commission") is Maine's quasi-independent, neutral, apolitical 
State agency charged with enforcing our state anti-discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 
4551, et seq. ("MHRA"). The Commission is statutorily charged with the duties of: investigating, conciliating, and 
at times litigating protected-class discrimination cases under the MHRA; promulgating rules and regulations to 
effectuate the Act; and making recommendations for further legislation or executive action concerning 
infringements on human rights in Maine. 5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11). The Commission, which also enforces the 
Maine Whistleblowers' Protection Act (”WPA"), 26 M.R.S. §§ 833, et seq., is pleased to provide this testimony 
neither for nor against LD 1001. 
What is a "Right-to-Sue" letter? 
Administrative agencies that enforce anti~discrimination laws, like the Commission, exist in every state and 
in many municipalities to serve multiple purposes, including (but not limited to): allowing government entities an 
opportunity to identify and address discrimination; reducing burdens on court systems by having admnistrative 
bodies handle discrimination claims; and providing aggrieved parties a lower-barrier forum for filing complaints 
than is typical for court systems. These agencies play such an important role in administering anti-discrimination 
laws that generally complainants are required by law to file their claims with an agency before they may proceed 
in a court action on their discrimination claims. With the MHRA and parallel federal anti-discrimination laws, this is 
accomplished by providing that a complainant is barred from obtaining all available statutory remedies in a court 
action if they did not first file their claim with the relevant administrative anti-discrimination agency and allow 
that agency an opportunity to evaluate their claims.- 
Generally, if an agency has not completed its review within 180 days of when a complaint is filed, the 
complainant may proceed to court with all possible statutory remedies available by obtaining a ”right-to-sue" 
letter ("RTS") from the administrative agency to show a court that the complainant exhausted the administrative 
requirement. The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), which enforces federal anti- 
discrimination laws such as Title Vll of the Civil Rights Act, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, and the 
Americans with Disabilities Act, has statutory authority to issue RTS after 180 days. See 29 C.F.R. § 1601.18. The 
Commission has a partnership agreement with EEOC to facilitate handling of federal cases arising in Maine, but 
the MHRA does not provide that the Commission may issue a RTS unless a Complainant requests one.
The Commission, Process, and RTS. 
Each year, the Commission receives ~600—800 intake questionnaires and "700-800 new complaint filings, 
issues "175-280 investigator reports, and processes/closes "700-800 cases. in a good year, staying current with 
this work is a challenge for the Commission's small staff. By the time a case has been pending with the 
Commission for about 180 days, we have: reviewed and assessed each intake and complaint forjurisdictional 
issues; notified respondents of complaints, obtained answers to the complaints, and asked complainants to 
provide all information they have to support their claims; and determined to dismiss some complaints for 
jurisdictional defects (untimely filing, lack ofjurisdiction), or for reasons like failure to cooperate with our process 
or bankruptcy filings. Many cases per year are resolved by agreement while at the Commission, whether through 
our internal mediation program or otherwise. At 180 days after filing, a Complainant may opt out ofthe 
Commission process and proceed to court with their MHRA claim by requesting a RTS, which ends the 
Commission's investigation. 
ln the hundreds of cases each year that are not so resolved, the Commission's same investigators conduct 
investigations and prepare case reports that summarize the claims made, relevant facts, and applicable law, and 
that make a recommendation to the Commission as to whether there are reasonable grounds to believe unlawful 
discrimination occurred. While some cases involve clear and serious or systemic MHRA violations that require 
substantial investigator time and resources, there are many cases which were legally sufficient to state a claim at 
the start of the process but which are revealed after initial pleadings to be quite weak. The Commission's staff 
must ensure that the agency meets statutory deadlines to complete investigations within 2 years of when a case 
was filed with the agency (or 100 days in housing cases). The appointed Commissioners hold monthly meetings 
open to the public at which they hear argument on contested cases, and they vote on each case. 
The Commission has a limited set of tools for managing the overwhelming number of complaints it 
receives. There exists a significant subset of Commission cases in which a complainant states a valid MHRA claim 
but their claims are weak (i.e., do not appear to be likely to lead to a finding that there are reasonable grounds to 
believe unlawful discrimination occurred), so focusing scarce agency resources on these cases is less than optimal. 
Currently, the Commission's only option for addressing these weak cases is to either issue an investigator's report 
or to administratively dismiss the case as unlikely to be substantiated. 
The proposal in Section 1 of LD 1001 would allow the Commission to do what the EEOC does in enforcing 
federal‘anti-discrimination laws: to do a preliminary investigation and, for cases that state a valid claim but are not 
strong, to issue a RTS allowing the complainant to proceed to court without the enforcing agency having to issue 
an opinion about how strong the case is (or is not). The Commission believes that the Section 1 proposal would 
be very helpful in preserving our agency's valuable resources for use in stronger cases. 
Summary. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony related to LD 1001. The Commission would be 
pleased to discuss these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this matter. 
Sincerely, 
.j/l~i¢,l,.2§, tl,~l _‘§jWft<W.. 
Amy l\/l. Sneirson, Executive Director’ 
Cc: Commissioners 
MHRC Testimony, LD 1001 March 21, 2023 Page 2 0f2
