Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  1 
  
 
2022 WL 2132368  
Only th e Westlaw citation is currently available.  
United States District Court, D. Maine.  
Mark ARDITO, Plaintiff,  
v. 
SOLVAY, S.A. , and Solvay Specialty 
Polymers USA, LLC, Defendants.  
1:21-cv-00142 -JAW  
| 
Signed 06/14/2022  
Attorneys and Law Firms  
David  G. Webbert , Johnson & Webbert, LLP, Augusta, 
ME, Eric L. Siegel , Pro Hac Vice, Kalbian Hagerty LLP, 
Washington, DC, Stacey D. Neumann , Alison E. Tozier , 
Murray Plumb & Murray, Portland, ME, for Plaintiff.  
B. Kurt Copper , Pro Hac  Vice, Jonathan D. Guynn , Pro 
Hac Vice, Jones Day, Dallas, TX, Joshua A. Randlett , 
Joshua A. Tardy , Jonathan P. Hunter , Rudman & 
Winchell, Bangor, ME, Rick Bergstrom , Pro Hac Vice, 
Jones Day, San Diego, CA, for Defendants.  
 
 
 
 
ORDER ON PENDING MOTIONS  
JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR. , UNITED STATES 
DISTRICT JUDGE  
*1 An employer -defendant brings a motion to dismiss an 
employee -plaintiff’s claims pursuant to Federal Rule of 
Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) . The employee alleges that the 
employer violated the Maine Human Rights Act and 
Maine Whistleblowers ’ Protection Act by creating a 
retaliatory hostile work environment. The Court 
concludes that the plaintiff has properly stated a claim on 
which  relief can be granted.  
  
 
 
I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY  On February 17, 2021, Mark Ardito filed a complaint in 
Kennebec County Superior Court in the state of Maine 
against Solvay S.A. (Solvay) and Solvay Specialty 
Polymers USA, LLC (SSP) alleging violations of the 
False Claims Act, Maine Whistleblowers ’ Protect ion Act, 
and the Maine Human Rights Act. Def.’s Notice of 
Removal  (ECF No. 1) ( Notice of Removal ), Attach. 1, 
Compl. and Demand for Jury Trial and Injunctive Relief 
Sought . On June 1, 2021, Solvay and SSP filed a notice 
removing the case from state to fede ral court. Notice of 
Removal  at 1-6. 
  
On June 8, 2021, Solvay and SSP filed separate motions 
to dismiss. Mot. to Dismiss of Def. Solvay Specialty 
Polymers USA, LLC  (ECF No. 9); Mot. to Dismiss of Def. 
Solvay S.A.  (ECF No. 11). On September 7, 2021, Mr. 
Ardito filed a motion for leave to file an amended 
complaint in lieu of an opposition to SSP’s pending 
motion to dismiss. Pl.’s Mot. for Leave to File Am. 
Compl.  at 1 (ECF No. 19). In that motion he conceded 
that the Court does not have personal jurisdiction  over 
Solvay. Id. On September 27, 2021, the Court granted Mr. 
Ardito leave to file an amended complaint, dismissed as 
moot and without prejudice SSP’s motion to dismiss, and 
dismissed without prejudice all claims against Solvay. 
Order  at 1 (ECF No. 23). S SP remains the only 
defendant.  
  
On September 29, 2021, Mr. Ardito filed his First 
Amended Complaint alleging violations of the Maine 
Whistleblowers ’ Protection Act and the Maine Human 
Rights Act. First Am. Compl. and Demand for Jury Trial 
and Injunctive R elief Sought  (ECF No. 24) ( First Am. 
Compl. ). The First Amended Complaint is now the 
operative complaint.  
  
On October 14, 2021, SSP filed a new motion to dismiss. 
Mot. to Dismiss of Def. Solvay Specialty Polymers USA, 
LLC (ECF No. 25) ( Def.’s Mot. ). On Oc tober 28, 2021, 
Mr. Ardito responded in opposition to SSP’s motion to 
dismiss. Pl.’s Opp’n to Def. ’s Mot. to Dismiss First Am. 
Compl.  (ECF No. 26) ( Pl.’s Opp’n ). On November 4, 
2021, SSP replied. Def.’s Reply in Supp. of its Mot. to 
Dismiss Pl. ’s First Am.  Compl.  (ECF No. 27) ( Def.’s 
Reply ). 
  
On March 5, 2022, Mr. Ardito filed a praecipe in support 
of his opposition to SSP’ s motion to dismiss, requesting 
that the Court take judicial notice of an attached 
Right -to-Sue letter from the Maine Human Rights 
Commission dated March 1, 2022. Pl.’s Praecipe in Supp. 
of His Opp’n to Def. ’s Mot. to Dismiss First Am. Compl. 
Pertaining to  Maine Human Rights Commission 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  2 
 Right -to-Sue Letter  (ECF No. 31) ( Pl.’s Praecipe ). On 
March 21, 2022, SSP objected to Mr. Ardito’s praecipe. 
Def. Solvay Specialty Polymers USA, LLC’s Resp. to Pl. ’s 
Praecipe in Supp. of His Opp’n to Def. ’s Mot. to Dismiss 
First Am. Compl.  (ECF No. 32) ( Def.’s Opp’n to 
Praecipe ). Finally, on March 23, 2022, Mr. Ardito 
responded to SSP’s objection to his praecipe. Pl.’s Reply 
to Def. ’s Resp. to His Praecip in Supp. of His Opp’n to 
Def.’s Mot. to Dismiss First Am. Compl.  (ECF No . 33) 
(Pl.’s Reply to Def. ’s Opp’n to Praecipe ). 
  
 
 
II. FACTS1 
1 
 Consistent with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
12(b)(6) , in describing the facts, the Court has relied 
upon the allegations in the Plaintiff’s ’ First Amended 
Complaint. Foley v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. , 772 F.3d 
63, 68 (1st C ir. 2014) ; Medina -Velázquez v. 
Hern ández-Gregorat , 767 F.3d 103, 108 (1st Cir. 2014)  
(“We examine whether the operative complaint states a 
claim for which relief can be granted when we construe 
the well -pleaded facts in the light most favorable to the 
plaintiffs, accepting their truth and drawing all 
reasonable inferences in plaintiffs ’ favor ” (internal 
citation omitted)).  
 
 
*2 In June 2003 Mr. Ardito began working for SSP, a 
subsidiary of Solvay S.A., one of the world’s largest 
chemical and plastics companies.2 First Am. Compl.  ¶¶ 
13-14. By 2016 Mr. Ardito was a Sales Development 
Manager responsible for the sale of high -performance 
plastics to public and private customers in North America. 
Id. ¶ 13. Throughout his employment at SSP, Mr. Ardito 
performed well and received favorable performance 
evaluations, including commendations for his strong work 
ethic, ability to negotiate and close sales, customer 
service, and his adaptability, drive, and commitment. Id. 
¶¶ 15-16. 
 2 
 The Plaintiff refers to the Defendant as “Solvay ” and 
the Defendant refers to itself as “SSP. ” The Court uses 
the Defendant’s preferred terminology.  
 
 
In his position, Mr. Ardito was privy to highly 
confidential customer information and trade secrets. Id. ¶ 
13. Customers and potential customers regularly provide 
SSP with confidential information about valuable 
intellectual property so that SSP can furthe r their unique 
interests. Id. ¶ 17. As a result, SSP enters into 
non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) with its 
high-performance plastics customers in the United States 
to protect the customers ’ confidential information and trade secrets. Id. ¶ 18. Specifically , the NDAs prohibit 
SSP from sharing confidential information and trade 
secrets with its employees and affiliates who do not “need 
to know ” that information. Id. ¶ 20. SSP stores 
confidential client information on the cloud -based 
platform, “Salesforce.com ” (Salesforce), a computing 
service that allows businesses to connect with customers. 
Id. ¶¶ 21-22. Mr. Ardito’s job frequently required him to 
organize meetings to discuss confidential projects and 
SSP management instructed him to document confidential 
meetings on Salesforce. Id. ¶ 22. 
  
 
 
A. SSP’s 2016 Reorganization  
In 2016, as part of its “Sky” reorganization project, SSP 
reassigned Mr. Ardito to the “Electrical and Electronics ” 
(E&E) market, reporting directly to Global Business 
Development Manager, Ron Chan, a Chinese national 
based out of SSP’s Chinese affiliate. Id. ¶ 23. The Sky 
reorganization  promoted collaboration among newly 
formed global market teams and provided SSP’s global 
affiliates access to U.S. customers ’ confidential and trade 
secret data stored on Salesforce. Id. ¶ 24. To Mr. Ardito’s 
knowledge, he was the first American employee i n SSP’s 
Global Business Unit (GBU) to report directly to a 
Chinese citizen manager and the first American to report 
to a manager based at SSP’s Chinese affiliate. Id. ¶ 25. As 
part of the reorganization, SSP gave Mr. Ardito 
responsibility over U.S. Electro nics and Semiconductor 
business development accounts, which included high -tech 
customers and amounted to over thirteen new accounts. 
Id. ¶ 26. 
  
In May 2017 Mr. Chan offered Mr. Ardito an opportunity 
to move to the west coast to be closer to his customers,  
80% of whom were located there. Id. ¶ 27. Mr. Ardito 
declined the offer, but SSP assured him that when it hired 
a new west coast sales representative, Mr. Ardito would 
have management and oversight over that person 
remotely from Maine. Id. This would be a  promotional 
opportunity considering Mr. Ardito’s well -documented 
career development plan at SSP. Id. Mr. Ardito’s 
performance records and evaluations reflect his career 
plan to work towards an Area Development Manager 
position at SSP, a higher -level posit ion than he occupied 
at the time. Id. ¶ 29. The number and nature of Mr. 
Ardito’s high -profile customers were, and are, directly 
related to his ability and/or opportunity to be promoted to 
a management level position at SSP. Id. ¶ 28. 
  
*3 In September 2017 Vivian Tong, also a Chinese 
national, replaced Mr. Chan as Mr. Ardito’s immediate 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  3 
 manager. Id. ¶ 30. Ms. Tong moved forward with hiring a 
sales representative on the west coast. Id. ¶ 31. Mr. Ardito 
expressed his willingne ss to relocate and be reassigned 
and/or apply for the position given his experience at SSP 
and relationships with SSP’s west coast customers. Id. 
Ms. Tong informed Mr. Ardito that he would be 
considered for the position or would have oversight over 
the new  hire given his years of experience at SSP. Id. 
However, SSP never interviewed or contacted Mr. Ardito 
to discuss the position. Id. ¶ 32. 
  
 
 
B. Mark Ardito Raises Concerns About SSP’s Usage 
of Client Information  
In the fall of 2017, Mr. Ardito became aware of potential 
breaches of U.S. customers ’ confidential and trade secret 
information. Id. ¶ 33. Mr. Ardito discovered that Ms. 
Tong’s other direct reports were interested in sharing a 
confidential technical breakthrough Mr. Ardito developed 
with a leading U.S. semiconductor client with other 
prosp ective SSP customers competing in the same market. 
Id. The potential market revenue for SSP as a result of 
this new application was worth in excess of $90 million 
per year globally. Id. Ms. Tong, who was responsible for 
approximately $100 million in sales growth per year, was 
also responsible for driving SSP’s polymer sales globally 
for her team, and Mr. Ardito became concerned that Ms. 
Tong and her direct reports were misusing confidential 
information in violation of customers ’ NDAs. Id. ¶¶ 
33-34. 
  
On Dec ember 15, 2017, after not hearing from Ms. Tong 
about reassignment to the vacant west coast position, Mr. 
Ardito contacted SSP’s Chief Executive Officer, Mike 
Finelli, regarding the position but did not receive a 
response. Id. ¶ 35. In January 2018, SSP hi red Patrick 
West as the west coast Sales Development Manager. Id. at 
36. Mr. Ardito thereafter began transferring accounts to 
Mr. West with the understanding that he would have 
oversight over Mr. West as the new Area Development 
Manager; however, Mr. Ardit o’s managerial oversight 
role never materialized. Id. ¶ 37. 
  
That same month, Mr. Ardito notified Ms. Tong that he 
was concerned that SSP was misappropriating 
confidential customer information by disclosing an 
American customer’s information to its compet itors to 
increase product sales. Id. ¶ 38. Ms. Tong disagreed with 
Mr. Ardito and supported the spread of customers ’ 
confidential information to competitors to increase SSP’s 
polymer sales. Id. Mr. Ardito appealed Ms. Tong’s 
decision to Wolf Sanner, anothe r SSP manager, who overrode Ms. Tong’s position and decision. Id. ¶ 39. 
  
From this point forward, Ms. Tong no longer supported 
Mr. Ardito’s promotion to Area Development Manager or 
his oversight over Mr. West. Id. ¶ 40. Around this same 
time, Ms. Tong beg an stripping Mr. Ardito of his clients 
and reassigning them to Mr. West. Id. ¶ 41. Of the 
approximately thirteen customer accounts Mr. Ardito 
handled before disclosing his concerns about the 
misappropriation of customer information, Ms. Tong 
reassigned nin e accounts to Mr. West without Mr. 
Ardito’s involvement or oversight. Id. ¶ 42. Ms. Tong 
instead assigned Mr. Ardito to handle exploratory 
accounts for an experimental SSP product, which had 
little potential for bonus compensation, was less 
high-profile in  the plastics industry, and would not serve 
as a vehicle for promotions in the future. Id. ¶ 43. 
  
 
 
C. Mark Ardito Escalates Disclosures of Concerns 
About Client Information Misappropriation  
On May 2, 2018, Mr. Ardito contacted SSP legal team 
member, Wendy Ho, to ask for assistance in addressing 
the confidentiality breach, protecting trade secrets o f his 
other customers, and navigating how to report Ms. Tong. 
Id. ¶ 44. Ms. Ho referred Mr. Ardito to Angela Reganall, 
SSP’s Regional Human Resources (HR) Manager. Id. ¶ 
45. Mr. Ardito also consulted his own outside legal 
counsel and conducted his own rese arch on how to protect 
and control confidential customer information and trade 
secrets. Id. ¶ 52. 
  
*4 Mr. Ardito contacted Ms. Reganall and explained his 
concerns about the misappropriation of American 
customers ’ confidenti al and trade secret information to 
benefit Solvay, S.A., SSP’s Chinese affiliate, and its 
Chinese customers. Id. ¶ 46. Mr. Ardito also expressed his 
concern about the high rate of turnover of Chinese 
employees leaving SSP to join Chinese competitors, 
poten tially using his customers ’ confidential and trade 
secret information. Id. ¶ 47. Mr. Ardito asked Ms. 
Reganall for tools to help him do his job in a legal and 
ethical manner, while protecting his customers ’ 
confidential information and trade secrets. Id. ¶ 48. Ms. 
Reganall informed Mr. Ardito that SSP had no policies or 
procedures to address protecting customers ’ confidential 
information and trade secrets. Id. ¶¶ 48-49. 
  
Mr. Ardito also told Ms. Reganall of his newly adopted 
practice of screening confident ial U.S. customer 
information from Ms. Tong in an effort to protect his U.S. 
customers pursuant to his NDA obligations, and to protect 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  4 
 himself from legal exposure resulting from any trade 
secret misappropriations. Id. ¶ 53. Ms. Reganall informed 
Mr. Ardito  that Ms. Tong would likely find out about his 
“whistleblower ” complaint. Id. ¶ 54. In response, Mr. 
Ardito expressed concern that offending Ms. Tong would 
damage his standing and career at SSP. Id. Ms. Reganall 
expressed support for his screening practice s and agreed 
that SSP needed to treat Chinese citizen employees 
differently. Id. ¶ 55. However, Ms. Reganall did not offer 
Mr. Ardito guidance or assistance on how to handle his 
reporting issue or how to explain his screening practice to 
Ms. Tong. Id. Mr. Ardito was concerned that Ms. 
Reganall’s failure to provide concrete action items to 
address his concern would lead to further retaliation from 
Ms. Tong. Id. ¶ 56. Over the next few months Mr. Ardito 
continued to screen American customers ’ confidential and  
trade secret information on Salesforce and provided Ms. 
Tong and other SSP Chinese affiliates confidential 
information on a “need to know ” basis. Id. ¶ 57. 
  
Around the same time that Mr. Ardito disclosed his 
concerns to Ms. Reganall, Ms. Tong began restr icting Mr. 
Ardito’s travel by limiting him to the United States. Id. ¶ 
50. During this time, Mr. Ardito was working on the final 
stages of a high priority SSP project and needed to travel 
to Asia to support the final production stages for the 
customer’s pr oduct; however, Ms. Tong prevented Mr. 
Ardito from working with the client overseas. Id. At the 
same time, Ms. Tong permitted the new hire, Mr. West, to 
travel globally for lower priority projects. Id. ¶ 51. 
  
 
 
D. SSP Orders Mark Ardito to Cease Screening 
American Clients ’ Confidential Information  
From May to September 2018, SSP repeatedly ordered 
Mr. Ardito to share confidential and trade secret 
information with Ms. Tong. Id. ¶ 60. Twice in September 
2018, Ms. Tong confronted Mr. Ardito and ordered him to 
stop screening his customers ’ information on Salesforce, 
in one instance berating him to end hi s screening 
procedures. Id. ¶¶ 58-59. Mr. Ardito alleges that Ms. 
Tong’s demand was effectively an order for him to violate 
SSP customers ’ NDAs and U.S. law. Id. ¶ 59. During this 
time all discussions of a promotion to Area Development 
Manager with associated oversight over the new west 
coast sales hire ceased, Mr. Ardito’s customer base 
dwindled, and his job responsibilities substantially 
changed, negatively impacting  his bonus potential and 
promotability. Id. ¶¶ 60-61. 
  
Feeling helpless, Mr. Ardito contacted Tom Wood, SSP’s 
Business Director, on September 27, 2018, and explained that he was trying to protect SSP and himself from 
liability. Id. ¶ 63. Mr. Wood responde d that “[b]ottom 
line, it’s not your decision to decide what to inform your 
manager or not. ” Id. ¶ 64. To Mr. Ardito, Mr. Wood’s 
statement made clear SSP senior management’s 
authorization to funnel American customers ’ confidential 
and trade secret informat ion directly to SSP’s Chinese 
affiliate. Id. Mr. Ardito alleges that he reasonably 
believed that SSP’s directives violated state and federal 
law but felt compelled to obey Mr. Wood’s orders out of 
fear of losing his job. Id. ¶ 65. Mr. Ardito thereafter 
acquiesced and allowed Ms. Tong unfettered access to 
confidential information on Salesforce. Id. ¶ 66. Mr. 
Ardito says that due to his managers ’ unlawful orders and 
the knowledge that he was involved in the potential 
misappropriation of confidential and trade  secret 
information in violation of state and federal law he 
reported to work each day with increasing stress resulting 
in physical symptoms. Id. ¶ 67. 
  
 
 
E. Mark Ardito Discovers Repeated 
Misappropriation of Trade Secrets  
*5 Shortly after Mr. Wood and Ms. Tong ordered Mr. 
Ardito to openly share c onfidential and trade secret 
information, Mr. Ardito discovered specific incidents of 
Chinese citizens located at SSP’s Chinese affiliate 
knowingly violating United States customers ’ NDAs by 
using their confidential and trade secret information to 
further the interests of their Chinese customers. Id. ¶ 68. 
Mr. Ardito alleges that the underlying motivation was the 
financial benefit to SSP’s Chinese affiliate from increased 
plastics business in China. Id. 
  
Mr. Ardito immediately reported his concerns about 
unlawful confidentiality breaches, in writing, to Ms. 
Reganall, Mr. Wood, and SSP Global Security Officer 
Satchit Srinivasan, on or about October 10, 16, and 17, 
November 9, and December 4 in 2018. Id. ¶ 69. 
Specifically, Mr. Ardito reported that Ms. Tong a nd her 
subordinates in China were funneling confidential 
information from a U.S. customer to benefit a major 
competitor in China, a company Mr. Ardito understood to 
be controlled by the Chinese government. Id. On October 
12, 2018, Mr. Ardito provided Mr. W ood with the 
specifics of the U.S. customer’s NDA. Id. ¶ 70. Mr. Wood 
reported back to Mr. Ardito that he asked Ms. Tong and 
another employee if any wrongdoing had occurred and 
concluded: “This is not an issue. ” Id. ¶ 71. However, 
neither Mr. Wood, nor any  other SSP management 
official or compliance employee, called for investigation 
into Mr. Ardito’s allegations. Id. Instead, Mr. Wood 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  5 
 instructed Mr. Ardito to improve communications with 
Ms. Tong regarding his American customers ’ account 
information. Id. ¶ 72. 
  
 
 
F. Mark Ardito Raises Concerns About Potential 
Breaches of Government Contracts  
In summe r 2018, Mr. Ardito reported his concerns to SSP 
management that Chinese citizen employees had access to 
confidential U.S. government and military information 
stored on Salesforce. Id. ¶ 73. SSP did not restrict access 
to highly confidential client informat ion on Salesforce. Id. 
Mr. Ardito did not receive a response when he reported 
these Salesforce security concerns in writing to 
management. Id. In 2014, SSP granted Mr. Ardito 
“Delegation of Authority ” to sign SSP’s U.S. government 
contracts, which made him  a “Responsible Party ” to 
ensure that SSP honored all contract terms. Id. ¶ 74. 
Government contracts required SSP to provide its 
employees with whistleblower training, which Mr. Ardito 
never received. Id. ¶¶ 74-75. As a Responsible Party, Mr. 
Ardito was vi gilant about his legal obligations and was 
concerned when others at SSP did not treat the 
government’s information with the same degree of 
protection. Id. ¶ 75. 
  
In July 2018, Mr. Ardito attended a training conducted by 
SSP’s Intellectual Assets Managemen t Group (IAM) 
regarding the protection and confidentiality of intellectual 
property and trade secrets. Id. ¶ 76. At the conclusion of 
the training, Mr. Ardito provided written comments to 
IAM explaining his concerns about Chinese nationals ’ 
access to U.S. government and military applications on 
Salesforce. Id. ¶ 77. Several months passed without 
anyone from IAM contacting Mr. Ardito. Id. ¶ 78. 
  
In September 2018, Mr. Ardito learned that SSP never 
limited access to specific customer accounts where 
confident ial project information about a government 
agency was held, resulting in Chinese employees, 
including Ms. Tong, Mr. Chan and Jun Zhang, having 
access through Salesforce. Id. ¶ 79. The government 
project at issue was high profile. Id. Mr. Ardito sent out a 
confidential call report about work on the project, which 
he logged on Salesforce. Id. ¶ 80. Mr. Ardito later learned 
that Mr. Sanner alerted SSP’s Salesforce management in 
China to restrict access to this confidential government 
information, but SSP never took protective action, leaving 
this information vulnerable to misappropriation by the 
Chinese government and other Chinese customers. Id. 
  
*6 On October 19, 2018, Mr. Ardito asked for assistance from Mr. Wood and Mr. Srinivasan and independently 
asked each of them to be present at a one -on-one meeting 
with Ms. Tong, initiated by Ms. Tong. Id. ¶ 81. Neither 
Mr. Wood nor Mr. Srinivasan responded. Id. On 
November 9, 2018, Mr. Ardito made a second reques t for 
Mr. Wood and Mr. Srinivasan’s assistance in his 
upcoming meeting with Ms. Tong, after Mr. Ardito 
caught a Chinese SSP affiliate colleague actively using 
Mr. Ardito’s customer’s confidential trade secret 
information to benefit a specific and known com petitor in 
China. Id. ¶ 82. Mr. Wood and Mr. Srinivasan declined. 
Id. 
  
Ms. Reganall informed Mr. Ardito that he should proceed 
with the one -on-one meeting with Ms. Tong and that 
leadership would not be involved. Id. ¶ 83. On November 
14, 2018, two days be fore the meeting, Mr. Ardito 
insisted that an HR representative be present for the 
meeting and Kerri Williams was assigned to attend the 
meeting to take place at SSP’s headquarters in Georgia. 
Id. ¶¶ 84-85. Prior to the meeting Mr. Ardito reached a 
breakin g point and was hospitalized for severe anxiety 
and panic attacks and was under a doctor’s orders not to 
travel to Georgia. Id. ¶ 85. 
  
During this same period from September to November 
2018, Ms. Tong praised Mr. West, the new west coast 
hire, for sharing  information in collaboration with 
Asia-based colleagues and criticized Mr. Ardito for not 
sharing this same information. Id. ¶ 86. 
  
 
 
G. Mark Ardito Files a Formal Whistleblower 
Complaint  
Due to SSP’ s failure to respond to his complaints, Mr. 
Ardito felt he had no other option but to force HR to act 
by filing a formal complaint about Ms. Tong, which Mr. 
Ardito did on November 10, 2018, in an email to Ms. 
Reganall and Leesa Branch. Id. ¶ 88. In his ema il to HR, 
Mr. Ardito reported that the situation was extremely 
stressful and that he was concerned it would lead to 
further issues. Id. ¶ 89. Mr. Ardito also reported his 
concerns via email to Georges Houtappel, SSP’s Senior 
Business Line Manager, on Novem ber 19, 2018. Id. ¶ 90. 
Mr. Houtappel did not respond until December 4, 2018, 
seventeen days later, during which time Mr. Ardito’s 
colleagues continued to use confidential U.S. customer 
information and trade secrets to benefit a Chinese 
competitor. Id. ¶ 91. 
  
 
 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  6 
 H. SSP’s Lawyers Contact Mark Ardito  
On December 5, 2018, Jeffrey Koenig, SSP’s Chief 
Emp loyment Litigation Counsel, contacted Mr. Ardito for 
the first time regarding Mr. Ardito’s whistleblower 
reports informally dating back to December 2017 and 
formally dating back to May 2, 2018. Id. ¶ 92. Mr. Koenig 
told Mr. Ardito that his allegations were  being taken 
seriously and SSP would conduct a through internal 
investigation, which Mr. Ardito alleges never took place. 
Id. ¶ 93. Mr. Ardito further contends that Mr. Koenig’s 
December 5, 2018, communication is an admission that 
SSP delayed for seven mon ths, and perhaps longer, before 
investigating his whistleblower reports. Id. ¶ 95. 
  
On December 14, 2018, approximately five months after 
Mr. Ardito’s disclosure to IAM, IAM lawyer Nikhil Patel 
contacted Mr. Ardito regarding his concerns as reported 
in Ju ly 2018. Id. ¶ 97. During a phone call between 
Attorney Patel and Mr. Ardito, Mr. Ardito again 
explained his concerns, specifically that Ms. Tong had 
unfettered access on Salesforce to a U.S. military 
customer account. Id. ¶ 98. Mr. Patel admitted that the  
IAM team is responsible for SSP’s management of 
confidential information and admitted that his team had 
no idea how Salesforce worked. Id. ¶¶ 99-100. Salesforce 
had been the mainframe database for SSP’s customer 
information for more than seven years. Id. ¶ 100. During 
the call Attorney Patel repeatedly stated that Mr. Ardito’s 
concerns were “100% correct ” and that SSP had “missed 
completely ” this hole in its confidentiality and trade secret 
protections. Id. ¶ 101. Attorney Patel promised Mr. Ardito 
he woul d send him the written materials from the July 
2018 training on confidentiality and trade secrets, but 
Attorney Patel never did. Id. ¶ 102. 
  
*7 Mr. Ardito maintains that he made diligent internal 
whistleblowing reports for more than seven months from 
May 2018 to December 2018 and that SSP took no 
corrective actions to stop the alleged illegal activity or 
prohibit retaliation against him. Id. ¶¶ 103-104. Instead, 
Mr. Ardito asserts that he was denied promotional 
opportunities  and stripped of high -profile accounts, and 
that SSP altered the terms and conditions of his 
employment making it impossible for him to conduct his 
job without violating the law or experiencing health 
problems. Id. Mr. Ardito alleges that SSP created an 
ongoing hostile and/or abusive work environment 
resulting in fear of losing his job, extreme distress, 
anxiety, panic attacks, and physical symptoms. Id. ¶ 105. 
  
 
 
I. Mark Ardito Takes Medical Leave  As a result of intolerable and hostile working conditions, 
repeated orders to violate the law, and SSP’s failure to 
investigate his concerns, all resultin g in mental anguish 
and distress, Mr. Ardito asserts he had no other 
reasonable option but to go on medical leave from SSP 
around December 10, 2018. Id. ¶ 107. Mr. Ardito’s 
medical condition, extreme stress, and ongoing panic 
attacks forced him to be out o f work between December 
2018 and September 2019. Id. ¶ 108. Mr. Ardito initially 
went on short -term disability for six months, and 
thereafter continued on long -term disability. Id. ¶ 109. 
While on long -term disability for his medical condition, 
Mr. Ardito received approximately 60% of his salary, 
thereby suffering economic damage as a result of SSP’s 
actions. Id. ¶ 110. Mr. Ardito alleges that in a letter dated 
May 15, 2019, SSP’s attorney Mr. Koenig falsely claimed 
that Mr. Ardito never reported his concer ns regarding 
Salesforce. Id. ¶ 111. This letter exacerbated Mr. Ardito’s 
existing medical symptoms. Id. ¶ 112. 
  
Around July 3, 2019, Mr. Ardito learned from his 
co-workers that the HR department had announced that he 
was no longer employed at SSP. Id. ¶ 114. Because Mr. 
Ardito was on long -term disability, he was no longer 
considered employed, and SSP completely stopped 
paying him. Id. ¶¶ 114-115. Mr. Ardito contacted SSP’s 
Benefits Center, which confirmed that he was no longer 
employed and provided former employee benefit 
instructions, including assistance in transferring his 401K 
from SSP’s retirement plan to an IRA. Id. ¶ 115. 
  
 
 
J. Mark Ardito Files a Complaint with the Maine 
Human Rights Commission  
On September 4, 2019, Mr. Ardito filed a complaint with 
the Maine Human Rights Commission (MHRC) alleging 
violations of the Maine Whistleblower  Protection Act 
(MWPA) and the Maine Human Rights Act (MHRA). Id. 
¶ 116. Prior to his filing this complaint, SSP offered to 
reinstate Mr. Ardito. Id. ¶ 117. On September 16, 2019, 
Mr. Ardito returned to work at SSP but with medical 
restrictions, including travel restrictions related to 
treatment for his ongoing medical symptoms. Id. ¶ 118. 
Prior to returning to work, SSP offered Mr. Ardito two 
options: (1) accept a different job with different 
responsibilities (related to an experimental product he had 
work ed on prior to his medical leave) and appointment to 
a new “Steering Committee ” to investigate and address 
protocols and security concerns related to American 
customers ’ intellectual property; or (2) go back to his 
former job in the E&E market but with a r educed and/or 
different customer account load from the one he had. Id. ¶ 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  7 
 119. With no such protocols in place at SSP, Mr. Ardito 
felt he had no choice but to accept the first option. Id. ¶ 
120. 
  
 
 
K. The Steering Committee  
Mr. Ardito alleges that the Steering Committee failed to 
reach its objectives in 2019, 2020, or 2021, and has not 
produced any output beyond asking another SSP 
department to do the work assigned to it. Id. ¶ 122. Mr. 
Ardito says that the Steering Committee  turned out to be a 
sham, meeting only on three occasions since the first 
meeting on October 18, 2019. Id. ¶ 123. Mr. Ardito was 
the only member of the committee who was furloughed 
for four weeks without pay during COVID -19 and was 
not allowed to participa te in Steering Committee teams to 
implement corrections to the confidentiality issues he had 
previously raised. Id. ¶ 124. 
  
*8 Despite efforts to block his contributions to the 
Steering Committee, Mr. Ardito created a 25 -slide, 
90-minute PowerPoint presentation proposing a plan to 
correct confidentiality failures and presented it to SSP 
management on March 30, 2020, August 31, 2020, and 
February 4, 5, and 8, 2021. Id. ¶ 126. Mr. Ardito 
repeatedly reported his concerns to the  Steering 
Committee, which included SSP attorney Wendy Ho, 
about SSP’s failure to prioritize customer confidentiality. 
Id. ¶ 127. In his capacity as a Steering Committee 
member, Mr. Ardito learned in February 2021 that other 
SSP staff had corroborated his concerns about security 
vulnerabilities, misappropriation of confidential and trade 
secret information, and potential legal exposure. Id. ¶ 128. 
Shortly after this, SSP restricted Mr. Ardito from 
receiving other information pertaining to his work on the 
Steering Committee, despite his ongoing work for the 
Committee. Id. ¶ 129. 
  
 
 
L. SSP Contacts Mar k Ardito’s Daughter  
On February 18, 2020, Mr. Ardito refuted SSP’s answer 
to his 2019 MHRC complaint and provided evidence to 
support his retaliation claim, which he maintains 
constituted protected activity under the MWPA. Id. ¶ 130. 
In response to SSP’s r equest for an expedited 
investigation process, the MHRC communicated that it 
had a backlog of cases and an investigator likely would 
not be assigned for “several months. ” Id. ¶ 131. 
  Two weeks later, on March 3, 2020, SSP sent a 
three -page, single -spaced demand letter to Mr. Ardito’s 
adult daughter and her direct supervisor at the law firm 
where she was employed in San Diego, California. Id. ¶ 
132. Mr. Ardito had no prior dealings with this law firm. 
Id. Mr. Ardito had not disclosed his daughter’s location , 
or her job, and the letter disclosed sensitive and private 
information about Mr. Ardito that he had not discussed 
with his daughter or her employer on any 
occasion —relating to his employment at SSP and his 
health condition. Id. ¶ 133. The March 3, 2020, letter 
demanded that Mr. Ardito’s daughter and her law firm 
preserve all documents related to Mr. Ardito’s medical 
condition and living conditions from January 1, 2017, 
onward. Id. ¶ 134. The letter also instructed Mr. Ardito’s 
daughter and her then -employ er to respond to SSP’s 
demands by Friday, March 13, 2020, or ten days later, 
even though MHRC had not assigned an investigator or 
opened the investigation. Id. ¶ 135. 
  
 
 
M. ark Ardito’s Poor Performance Evaluation and 
Reduced Involvement on the Steering Committee  
On November 4, 2020, Mr. Ardito provided a detailed 
response to the MHRC Investigator’s  report, further 
refuting SSP’s answer and defenses, which Mr. Ardito 
asserts is also protected activity under the MWPA. Id. ¶ 
136. On November 16, 2020, Mr. Ardito testified against 
SSP at the MHRC hearing, at which time MHRC issued a 
Notice of Right to S ue. Id. ¶ 137. 
  
Approximately two months later, on January 29, 2021, 
SSP issued and documented, with purportedly false 
information, Mr. Ardito’s first negative performance 
review after seventeen years of favorable performance 
evaluations. Id. ¶ 139. Mr. A rdito achieved his largest 
ever increase in sales of over $2,000,000, 114% of SSP’s 
defined target. Id. ¶ 140. Additionally, the Steering 
Committee members praised Mr. Ardito for his efforts in 
delivering a comprehensive proposal to improve SSP’s 
practices  for handling confidential information. Id. ¶ 141. 
SSP CEO Mike Finelli previously told Mr. Ardito that the 
Steering Committee’s efforts were one of his top five 
priorities for the company and that the Committee would 
continue to be 15 -20% of Mr. Ardito’s responsibilities. Id. 
¶ 142. Mr. Ardito achieved his remaining responsibilities 
with above -average price increases and successful 
marketing activities. Id. ¶ 143. Mr. Ardito also led efforts 
to improve the effectiveness of SSP’s credit and 
collections effo rts to improve on -time payment 
performance for two of his customers with poor payment 
histories. Id. ¶ 144. In other words, Mr. Ardito says that 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  8 
 2020 was one of his best performing years. Id. ¶ 145. 
  
*9 Mr. Ardito alleges t hat his manager, Rosyln Smith, 
repeatedly attempted to downgrade Mr. Ardito’s 
performance, gave false information to him and SSP’s 
attorney, Ms. Ho, and engaged in other conduct Mr. 
Ardito found unethical and which he reported to Ms. 
Reganall at HR. Id. ¶ 146. Ms. Smith repeatedly 
attempted to reduce Mr. Ardito’s responsibilities on the 
Steering Committee from 20% to 0% despite the CEO’s 
priorities. Id. In February 2021, Ms. Smith downgraded 
his performance evaluation to a “poor” rating, including a 
score o f “2” on a 1 to 5 scale as a “partial contributor. ” Id. 
¶ 147. Mr. Ardito protested the downgrade to HR and Ms. 
Reganall but was not given an opportunity to appeal. Id. ¶ 
148. Mr. Ardito alleges that just after his ninety -day 
deadline to file a lawsuit exp ired, SSP reduced his role on 
the Steering Committee from approximately 20% to 3% 
with no underlying performance metrics. Id. ¶ 149. CEO 
Finelli stated to Mr. Ardito that he had “changed his 
mind ” about Mr. Ardito’s level of involvement in the 
Committee. Id. 
  
 
 
N. Mark Ardito Files a MWPA Lawsuit  
Mr. Ardito filed his Complaint in state court in February 
2021, although SSP had no knowledge of the lawsuit until 
it was served with the Complaint on May 11, 2021. Id. ¶¶ 
151-152. On June 5, 2021, Keri Williams, SSP’s HR 
representative, made clear that any further discussions 
about promot ion were “off the table. ” Id. ¶ 153. Mr. 
Ardito says that Ms. Williams ’ statement that his career at 
SSP was at a dead end occurred less than one month after 
SSP learned of Mr. Ardito’s state court action. Id. ¶ 154. 
Around this same time, Mr. Ardito learn ed that Mr. 
Koenig was behind efforts to downgrade his performance 
and end his career at SSP. Id. ¶ 155. In an email to Ms. 
Smith and Ms. Williams, on which Mr. Ardito was 
copied, Mr. Koenig stated “Needless to say, we shouldn’t 
trust him. We watch him lik e a hawk. ” Id. 
  
 
 
O. Mark Ardito Exhausts Administrative Remedies  
On September 4, 2019, Mr. Ard ito filed an unlawful 
whistleblower retaliation claim against SSP with the 
MHRC. Id. ¶ 157. On November 18, 2020, Mr. Ardito 
received a Notice of Right to Sue from the MHRC. Id. ¶ 
158. On August 31, 2021, Mr. Ardito filed another 
MHRC complaint covering ad ditional adverse actions. Id. ¶ 161. 
  
 
 
III. THE PARTIES ’ POSITIONS  
 
A. SSP’s Motion to Dismiss  
SSP argues that Mr. “Ardito cannot state a prima facie 
case because he has not plausibly alleged that [SSP] 
subjected him to a material adverse employment action 
within the st atute of limitations. ” Def.’s Mot.  at 8. First, 
SSP argues that “the Court must disregard [Mr.] Ardito’s 
alleged adverse actions that postdate his 2019 MHRC 
complaint. ” Id. at 9. It contends that Mr. Ardito’s 
allegations related to his negative performance  review in 
January 2021, and subsequent reduced role on the 
Steering Committee, are the subject of a pending MHRC 
complaint filed August 31, 2021, and thus, these claims 
are not yet ripe. Id. SSP says that Mr. Ardito has 
acknowledged the ripeness issue and  yet “is attempting to 
plead his way around MHRA’s requirement that plaintiffs 
exhaust their claims with the Commission or surrender 
their right to seek monetary relief. ” Id. Ultimately, SSP’s 
position is that those events “must be disregarded for 
purposes  of the present Motion. ” Id. at 10.  
  
Second, SSP submits that “[Mr.] Ardito’s allegations that 
he was denied a job transfer, denied a promotion, and 
forced to transfer clients in 2017 and January 2018 are 
outside of the statute of limitations. ” Id. It arg ues that 
“[c]laims of retaliation under the MWPA are subject to 
the [two year] limitations period[ ] provided by the 
MHRA. ” Id. SSP says that a failure to promote or the 
forced transfer of clients are all discrete acts and the clock 
on filing discriminatio n charges for each act begins 
running on the date that the event allegedly occurred. Id. 
at 11. It therefore reasons that claims arising from events 
in 2017 and early 2018 are untimely. Id. at 12.  
  
As to the promotion denial, SSP argues that it offered Mr . 
Ardito the west coast position, which he rejected, and by 
the time he changed his mind, there was already a search 
underway for a different employee to fill the position. Id. 
SSP emphasizes that Mr. Ardito did not allege that the 
position was open or tha t he applied for it. Id. at 13. SSP 
further argues that “[Mr.] Ardito cannot save his 
newly -added untimely allegations through ‘relation back ’ 
to his original complaint with the MHRC and the Superior 
Court ” because his “initial MHRC complaint makes no 
ment ion of the Sales Development Manager Position, 
Area Development Manager position, that he was denied 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  9 
 a promotion, or that he was forced to transfer his clients to 
Mr. West. ” Id. It says that “[Mr.] Ardito’s original MHRC 
complaint states that the ‘earliest  date’ the alleged 
‘discrimination took place ’ was ‘05/02/2018. ’ ” Id. at 14. 
SSP asserts that “the relevant inquiry is whether the[ ] 
allegations were raised in a complaint filed in court within 
two years of when they occurred ” but Mr. Ardito “first 
raise d ... allegations in his FAC filed on September 7, 
2021 – more than 3 years and 7 months after the events 
allegedly occurred ” which means that “he cannot rely on 
them to show a prima facie  case of employment 
retaliation. ” Id. at 14 -15. SSP says that even i f Mr. Ardito 
relied on his initial pleading with the Maine Superior 
Court, the complaint would still be time barred. Id. at 15.  
  
*10 Third, SSP argues that Mr. Ardito “has not alleged a 
plausible claim for failure -to-prom ote” because he “has 
not alleged that: (1) there was an open Area Development 
Manager position in late 2017 or early 2018, (2) that he 
ever applied for that position, or (3) that [SSP] hired 
someone with equal qualifications into that position 
instead of h im.” Id. at 16. Thus, SSP reasons that Mr. 
Ardito has “failed to plead the basic elements necessary 
for this claim and it should be dismissed. ” Id. 
  
Fourth, SSP contends that “[Mr.] Ardito has not plausibly 
alleged a hostile work environment. ” Id. It note s 
specifically that “the Maine Law Court has not held that a 
hostile work environment can constitute an adverse 
employment action under the MWPA ” but instead “uses a 
standard ‘concurrent with Title VII. ’ ” Id. at 16 -17. SSP 
argues that this is a high stand ard, and Mr. Ardito has not 
alleged that “supervisors or co -workers uttered offensive 
statements ” about him, physically abused him, or 
harassed him in any other way. Id. at 17 -18. It says that 
allegations of mental anguish are “insufficient to plead a 
‘hostile or abusive ’ work environment, particularly when 
stacked up against the multiple olive branches that SSP 
extended to [Mr.] Ardito. ” Id. at 18.  
  
SSP further argues that the bar of proof is even higher for 
Mr. Ardito’s retaliatory hostile work environme nt claim 
and he cannot build a case on “his coworker’s refusals to 
take his side in his disagreement with his supervisor and 
decision to single out his Chinese colleagues by 
withholding information from them. ” Id. at 19.  
  
Fifth, SSP’s position is that “[Mr.] Ardito’s other 
allegations fail as a matter of law. ” Id. SSP says that Mr. 
Ardito does not explain why he believes that SSP 
“materially changed the terms and conditions ” of his 
employment, especially given that SSP offered him a 
position with more co mpensation and responsibility upon 
his return from medical leave. Id. As to the document preservation notice sent to Mr. Ardito’s daughter, SSP 
argues that an adverse action must be material, meaning 
that it must “dissuade a reasonable worker from engaging  
in protected activity, ” unlike the issuance of litigation 
notice letters which is “a routine practice by parties to 
ensure compliance with discovery obligations. ” Id. at 20.  
  
 
 
B. Mark Ardito’s Opposition  
First, Mr. Ardito asserts that his allegations of “2020 and 
2021 adverse actions stemming from [his] 2021 MHRC 
complaint [are] properly included in the Complaint. ” Pl.’s 
Opp’n  at 5. He disputes SSP’s assertion that he is 
“attempting to plead his way around administrative 
exhaustion requirements ” and instea d says that he 
included his 2021 MHRC complaint in the First Amended 
Complaint to “eliminate any surprises and to allow those 
actions to be the subject of discovery pending a motion to 
amend to make those claims cognizable. ” Id. He also says 
that he seeks to “avoid any future claim of prejudice by 
[SSP] when he seeks leave of this Court to amend his 
[First Amended Complaint] to conform to the issuance of 
the Right to Sue letter in February 2022. ” Id. Mr. Ardito 
“agrees with Defendant that these adverse acti ons should 
be disregarded by the Court ” and alternatively “moves to 
stay these proceedings until February 28, 2022 when he 
receives his notice of right to sue from the MHRC. ” Id. at 
5-6. 
  
Second, as to the substance of SSP’s arguments, Mr. 
Ardito argues t hat he “has alleged sufficient facts of a 
retaliatory hostile work environment to overcome 
dismissal. ” Id. at 7. He disputes SSP’s assertion that 
because “the Main[e] Law Court has not expressly held 
that a hostile work environment can constitute an advers e 
employment action under the WPA ” that the Court should 
not recognize a WPA claim on his facts. Id. He reasons 
that “[judicial] construction of the MHRA and WPA has 
been guided by federal law, ” id. at 8 (quoting Currie v. 
Indus. Sec., Inc. , 2007 ME 12, ¶ 13, 915 A.2d 400, 404 ), 
and that “[t]he First Circuit Court of Appeals has 
recognized a retaliatory hostile work environment claim 
in the employment discrimination context for over 15 
years. ” Id. (citing Noviello v. City of Bos. , 398 F.3d 76, 
88-90 (1st Cir. 2005) ). 
  
*11 Mr. Ardito submits that “[a]nalyzing facts under 
hostile work environment standards at the pleading stage 
... is no t as onerous as later stages in the proceeding, ” id. 
at 10, and “courts shy [away] from evaluating the specific 
instances of misconduct alleged in a complaint against the 
legal standard for hostile work environment claims, 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  10 
 because there is no ‘obligation o n the pleader to identify 
in the complaint all the evidence that would later be 
offered in support of the claim pleaded. ’ ” Id. at 10 -11 
(quoting Fisk v. Mid Coast Presbyterian Church , No. 
2:16-cv-00490 -JDL, 2017 WL 1755950 at *4, 2017 U.S. 
Dist. LEX IS 68177 at *10 -11 (D. Me. May 4, 2017) ). 
Citing the First Amended Complaint, Mr. Ardito insists 
that he “was gaslighted, intimidated and falsely accused 
of misconduct, ” “excluded and denied support ” and 
necessary travel, he experienced “open and direct  
hostility, ” he was “torment[ed], humilat[ed], and 
intimidate[d] ” by his supervisor, SSP pressed him into 
breaching client NDAs and “fail[ed] to investigate and 
take his concerns seriously, ” all of which “contributed to 
physical and psychological problems that required 
treatment. ” Id. at 11.  
  
Mr. Ardito submits that SSP “makes much of the fact that 
[he] fails to allege that his supervisors or co -workers 
‘uttered offensive comments ’ concerning him or that ‘he 
was physically abused or menaced by anyone at [S SP].’ ” 
Id. at 12  (quoting Def.’s Mot.  at 17). In response, Mr. 
Ardito contends that he has presented “offensive 
statements ” to support a retaliatory hostile work 
environment claim, because “offensive ” literall y means 
“causing someone to feel deeply hurt, upset or angry. ” Id. 
(quoting Merriam -Webster Dictionary ). He reasons that 
“he was repeatedly offended by [SSP] manager comments 
and orders ” in that his supervisors “repeatedly threatened 
and ordered him to par ticipate in the misappropriation of 
trade secrets ” resulting in “extreme stress and anxiety, 
deteriorating health and suffering an emotional 
breakdown requiring hospitalization, ” thus “a reasonable 
inference can be drawn that he was deeply hurt, upset, and  
harbored resentment, i.e., offended. ” Id. at 12 -13. Mr. 
Ardito says that he “has alleged facts demonstrating 
adverse actions, unlawful orders, gaslighting, a 7 -month 
failure to investigate his complaints, incl uding a formal 
complaint against his manager, Ms. Tong ” which he says 
together “plausibly constitute a retaliatory hostile work 
environment. ” Id. at 13 . 
  
Mr. Ardito rejects SSP’s contention that it extended hi m 
“olive branches, ” arguing that such “olive branches ” were 
not actually given, nor were they sincere. Id. He says that 
“management either ignored him, rebuffed him, [or] 
gaslighted him ” and “neither [SSP] ’s legal team ... nor its 
compliance department too k any action ” and did not 
attempt to investigate for seven months. Id. at 13 -14. Mr. 
Ardito further dismisses SSP’s argument that his paid 
medical leave was an “olive branch ” because “medical 
leave is a fringe benefit and [an] entitlement of all 
employees. ” Finally, Mr. Ardito says that “placing him on 
a Steering Committee was also a bogus ‘olive branch ’ because (1) the percentage of time for which he was given 
credit toward his perform ance evaluation was reduced to 
virtually zero ...; (2) the Steering Committee produced no 
deliverables despite his diligent efforts; and (3) ... the 
Committee has excluded him from meetings and other 
actions. ” Id. at 14. Mr. Ardito further distinguishes th at 
his case involves conduct by supervisors rather than 
coworkers, and thus SSP’s reference to caselaw pertaining 
to “failure to take sides ” and related tensions among 
employees is misplaced. Id. at 14 -15. 
  
Third, Mr. Ardito argues that he “has not challe nged as 
discrete adverse actions ” SSP’s “denial of a job transfer, 
promotion denials and forced client account transfers in 
2018; rather, they are part of the retaliatory hostile work 
environment and are, therefore, actionable. ” Id. at 15. He 
contends that  “Defendant’s argument that claims of 
retaliation under the MWPA are subject to the 2 -year 
limitations period provided by the MHRA is wrong ” and 
that “[t]he time period can be longer than two years per 
the statute because the law provides that the statute of 
limitations runs 90 days after the MHRC has completed 
the case. ” Id. He also submits that SSP’s actions “support 
a basis for liability under a ‘continuing violations ’ theory, 
which ‘allows an employee to seek damages for otherwise 
time-barred allegation s if they are deemed part of an 
ongoing series of discriminatory acts and there is “some 
violation within the statute of limitations period that 
anchors the earlier claims. ’ ” ” Id. at 16 (quoting 
Lockridge v. Uni v. Me. Sys. , 597 F.3d 464, 474 (1st Cir. 
2010)  (quoting O’Rourke v. City of Providence , 235 F.3d 
713, 730 (1st Cir. 2001) )). Thus, Mr. Ardito claims that 
“adverse actions that occurred in 2018 during the sam e 
time that Mr. Ardito made protected disclosures that his 
Chinese supervisor and co -workers were illegally 
misappropriating trade secrets from his U.S. customers 
are part of the ongoing retaliatory hostile work 
environment, precluding dismissal. ” Id. at 17 (emphasis in 
original).  
  
*12 Fourth, Mr. Ardito argues that the “Defendant’s 
abrupt contact with [his] daughter and her law firm in 
California with irrelevant discovery demands altered [his] 
terms and conditions of empl oyment by intimidating him 
and seeking to dissuade him from pursuing his internal 
and MHRC complaints. ” Id. To begin, Mr. Ardito 
disputes that he admitted that upon his return from leave 
he was offered a better position “with more compensation 
and responsi bilities. ” Id. at 18 (quoting Def.’s Mot.  at 19). 
He says that he was “offered a Hobson’s Choice ” to either 
go back to his original position where he would be forced 
to participate in the misappropriation of trade secrets or 
accept a less prestigious job w ith accompanying work on 
the “sham ” Steering Committee. Id. 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  11 
   
Mr. Ardito submits that he did experience an adverse 
employment action because “he was divested of 
significant and lucrative job responsibilities and given 
disadvantageous job assignments ... de spite his career 
plan, years of exemplary job performance ... and previous 
statements by SSP management that he was in line for 
promotion. ” Id. at 19. Moreover, he explains that “[w]hile 
litigants may routinely issue litigation hold letters during 
pending litigation, there was no pending investigation by 
MHRC and no ‘litigation ’ in the form of a lawsuit. ” Id. at 
20. Mr. Ardito concludes that SSP’s letter “was not a 
traditional litigation hold letter seeking merely to preserve 
material[s] ” because the letter  sought “expansive and 
irrelevant document[s] ” about Mr. Ardito’s “medical 
condition, activities, whereabouts, and lifestyle and living 
conditions. ” Id. 
  
 
 
C. SSP’s Reply  
In reply, SSP claims that “[Mr.] Ardito agrees that his 
allegations regarding a negative performance review and 
decreased participation on the Steering Committee in 
2021 post -date [his] September 2019 MHRC complaint, 
are not part of this lawsuit, and should not be considered 
on SSP’ s motion to dismiss. Def.’s Reply  at 1. Moreover, 
SSP submits that “[Mr.] Ardito’s ‘failure to promote or 
transfer ’ and ‘transfer of clients ’ allegations fail ” because 
the “continuing violation ” doctrine does not apply here. 
Id. at 2. It says that “[t]o in voke the continuing violation 
doctrine, [Mr.] Ardito must demonstrate similarity and a 
substantial relationship between the timely and untimely 
acts,” which he has not done. Id. at 2-3. Alternatively, 
SSP argues that Mr. Ardito’s allegations present “discr ete 
acts” that fall outside the scope of the doctrine. Id. at 3. 
  
SSP reasserts that Mr. Ardito’s “retaliatory hostile work 
environment claim is not cognizable under the MWPA as 
a matter of law ” because, despite his insistence that the 
Court can look to f ederal law recognizing such claims for 
guidance, “[c]ourts applying Maine law have ruled on 
such claims for decades, under appropriate statutory 
predicates [which do not interpret “adverse action ” to 
include a retaliatory hostile work environment], yet no 
court has ever permitted an MWPA claim to move 
forward under a retaliatory hostile work environment 
theory. ” Id. at 4. SSP also repeats that “[Mr.] Ardito’s 
allegations cannot meet the standard for pleading that he 
was subjected to a hostile work environme nt,” because 
although Mr. Ardito “identifies the allegations that he 
thinks state a retaliatory hostile work environment claim ” 
the First Amended Complaint “do[es] not actually contain the factual material he purports to recite in his brief. Id. at 
5. 
  
Finally, SSP concludes that its “document preservation 
letters were not retaliatory acts ” and says that Mr. 
Ardito’s reliance on Rivera -Rivera v. Medina Medina, 
Inc., 898 F.3d 77 (1st Cir. 2018) , is unpersuasive because 
the case is factually disting uishable. Id. at 7.  
  
 
 
D. The Praecipe  
In his praecipe, Mr. Ardito attaches his Marc h 1, 2022, 
right -to-sue letter as proof that he exhausted his 
administrative remedies and asks the Court to “take 
judicial notice of [the] document. ” Pl.’s Praecipe  at 1. In 
its objection to Mr. Ardito’s praecipe, SSP argues that Mr. 
Ardito “provides no ra tionale to grant his request for 
judicial notice ” and “fails to explain how judicial notice 
of the Commission’s Right -to-Sue letter would bolster his 
opposition to SSP’s Motion to Dismiss the First Amended 
Complaint. ” Def.’s Opp’n to Praecipe  at 1. SSP fur ther 
contends that “because [Mr.] Ardito has not sought leave 
to inject his latest allegations against SSP into this case 
through another amendment [of the complaint], the 
Right -to-Sue letter is not relevant to [the] resolution of 
SSP’s Motion to Dismiss. ” Id. at 2. SSP concludes by 
reiterating its argument that dismissal is appropriate 
regardless of Mr. Ardito’s latest right -to-sue letter. Id. at 
3. In reply, Mr. Ardito asserts that the allegations 
implicated by his latest right -to-sue letter are already 
before the Court in the First Amended Complaint and that 
no further amendment is needed. Pl.’s Reply to Def. ’s 
Opp’n to Praecipe  at 2. As a result, Mr. Ardito submits 
that the Court may take judicial notice of the March 1, 
2022, letter pursuant to Federa l Rule of Evidence 201 . Id. 
at 1-2. 
  
 
 
IV. LEGAL STANDARD  
*13 Rule 12(b)(6)  requires dismissal of a complaint that 
“fail[s] to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. ” 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) . To state a claim, a complaint 
must contain, among other things, “a short and plain 
statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled 
to relief. ” Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2) . In other words, a 
complaint must contain “sufficient factual matter, 
accepted as true, to ‘state a claim to relief that is plausible 
on its face. ’ ” Ashcroft v. Iqbal , 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 
S.Ct. 1937, 173 L.Ed.2d 868 (2009)  (quoting Bell Atl. 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  12 
 Corp. v. Twombly , 550 U.S. 544, 570, 127 S.Ct. 1955, 
167 L.Ed.2d 929 (2007) ). A claim is f acially plausible 
when “the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the 
court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant 
is liable for the misconduct alleged. ” Id. (citing Twombly , 
550 U.S. at 556, 127 S.Ct. 1955 ). Plausible means “ 
‘something more than merely possible ’ or ‘merely 
consistent with a defendant’s liability. ’ ” Germanowski v. 
Harris , 854 F.3d 68, 71 -72 (1st Cir. 2017)  (internal 
citation omitted) (quoting Schatz v. Republican State 
Leadership Comm. , 669 F.3d 50, 55 (1st Cir. 2012) ; 
Ocasio -Hern ández v. Fortuño -Burset , 640 F.3d 1, 11 (1st 
Cir. 2011) ). This is a “ ‘context -specific ’ job that compels 
[judges] ‘to draw on ’ [their] ‘judicial experience and 
common sense. ’ ” Schatz , 669 F.3d at 55  (quoting Iqbal , 
556 U.S. at 679, 129 S.Ct. 1937 ). 
  
This is a “two-step analysis. ” Cardigan Mountain Sch. v. 
N.H. Ins. Co. , 787 F.3d 82, 84 (1st Cir. 2015) . “First, the 
court must distinguish ‘the complaint’s factual allegations 
(which must be accepted as true) from its conclusory legal 
allegations (which need not be credited). ’ ” 
Garc ía-Catal án v. United States , 734 F.3d 100, 103 (1st  
Cir. 2013)  (quoting Morales -Cruz v. Univ. of P.R. , 676 
F.3d 220, 224 (1st Cir. 2012) ); see also  Schatz , 669 F.3d 
at 55  (stating that a court may “isolate and igno re 
statements in the complaint that simply offer legal labels 
and conclusions or merely rehash cause -of-action 
elements ”). “Second, the court must determine whether 
the factual allegations are sufficient to support ‘the 
reasonable inference that the defend ant is liable for the 
misconduct alleged. ’ ” García -Catalán , 734 F.3d at 103  
(quoting Haley v. City of Bos. , 657 F.3d 39, 46 (1st Cir. 
2011) ). 
  
 
 
V. DISCUSSION  
 
A. The Maine Whistle blowers ’ Protection Act and 
the Maine Human Rights Act  
In his First Amended Complaint, Mr. Ardito alleges that 
SSP retaliated against him in violation of the Maine 
Whistleblowers ’ Protection Act (MWPA) and the Maine 
Human Rights Act (MHRA). The MWPA provides, in 
relevant part:  
1. Discrimination prohibited.  No employer may 
discharge, threaten or otherwise discriminate against an 
employee regarding the employee’s compensation, 
terms,  conditions, location or privileges of employment because:  
A. The employee, acting in good faith, or a person 
acting on behalf of the employee, reports orally or in 
writing to the employer or a public body what the 
employee has reasonable cause to believe is a 
violation of a law or rule adopted under the laws of 
this State, a political subdivision of this State or the 
United States;  
26 M.R.S. § 833(1)(A) . The plaintiff has the 
“undemanding task of demonstrating a prima facie case3 
of unlawful retaliation. ” Osher v. Univ. of Me. Sys. , 703 
F. Supp. 2d 51, 64 (D. Me. 2010)  (citing Mesnick v. Gen. 
Elec. Co. , 950 F.2d 816, 823 (1st Cir. 1991) ). To establish 
a prima facie c ase of retaliation under the MWPA the 
plaintiff must show: “(1) [ ]he engaged in activity 
protected by the statute, (2) [ ]he was the subject of 
adverse employment action, and (3) there was a causal 
link between the protected activity and the adverse 
emplo yment action. ”4 Sullivan v. St. Joseph’s Rehab. & 
Residence , 2016 ME 107, ¶ 14, 143 A.3d 1283  (internal 
quotation marks omitted).  
 3 
 The First Circuit stated that “[t]he prima facie standard 
is an evidentiary standard, not a pleading standard, and 
there is no need to set fort h a detailed evidentiary 
proffer in a complaint. ” Rodr íguez-Reyes v. 
Molina -Rodríguez , 711 F.3d 49, 54 (1st Cir. 2013) . 
Because the prima facie “elements are part of the 
background against which a plausibility determination 
should be made ” the Court uses these elements “as a 
prism to shed light upon the plausibility of [Mr. 
Ardito’s] claim. ” Id. at 54 . To  the extent that Mr. 
Ardito properly alleges a prima facie case, “it ipso facto 
satisfies the plausibility standard. ” Corson v. Modula, 
Inc., No. 2:20 -CV-104-DBH, 2020 WL 4194498 at 
*–––– , 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 128437 at *14 (D. Me. 
July 21, 2020)  (concluding that where the plaintiff 
meets the prima facie standard in her complaint, she 
simultaneous pleads a plausible claim to defeat a 
motion to dismiss).  
 
 
4 
 As this Court has recognized, there is tension between 
the statutory language of the MHRA and MWPA:  
Maine courts have adopted the language of section 
833 with regard to all three elements of an  MWPA 
action even though section 4572, which is the 
conduit for an MWPA action, defines adverse 
employment action differently than section 833 . 
Section 833  limits adverse employment action to 
discharging, threatening, and otherwise 
discrimi nating “against an employee regarding the 
employee’s compensation, terms, conditions, 
location[ ] or privileges of employment; ” section 
4572 has a broader scope, defining unlawful 
employment discrimination as “to discharge an 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  13 
 employee or discriminate with respect to hire, tenure, 
promotion, transfer, compensation, terms, conditions, 
or privileges of employment or any other matter 
directly or indirectly related to employment ” because 
of an employee’s protected activity. 5 M.R.S. § 
4572 . The clause, “any other matter directly or 
indirectly related to employment, ” contemplates a 
broader scope of employer conduct that could be 
considered adverse employment action. It is 
uncertain how this language applies to MWPA 
claims, but since section 4572  is the provision 
providing a right of action to whistleblowers, the 
Court is reluctant to view it as surplusage.  
Charette , 332 F. Supp. 3d at 356 n.41  (quoting Thayer 
Corp. v. Reed , No. 2:10 -cv-00423 -JAW,  2011 WL 
2682723 at * –––– , 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 74229 at 
*60-61 (D. Me. July 11, 2011) ). Here, however, Mr. 
Ardito alleged violations of the MRHA retaliation 
provision, 5 M.R.S. § 4633 , rather than section 4572 , 
although both provisions  prohibit the same or similar 
conduct and provide for the same remedies. See 
Gallagher v. Penobscot Cmty. Healthcare , No. 
CV-16-54, 2017 WL 590288 at * –––– , 2017 Me. 
Super. LEXIS 215 at *10 -11 (Me. Super. Ct. Mar. 21, 
2017)  (explaining the scope of protection and remedies 
available under § 4633  and § 4572 ). 
 
 
*14 Similarly, pursuant to the MHRA,5 “[a] person may 
not discriminate against any individual because that 
individual has opposed any act or practice that is unlawful 
under this Act or because that individual made a charge, 
testified, assisted or participat ed in any manner in an 
investigation, proceeding or hearing under this Act. ” 5 
M.R.S. § 4633 . As with the MWPA, a plaintiff bringing a 
claim for retaliation under the MHRA “must show that: 
(1) he engaged in protected conduct under the statute; (2) 
he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) a 
causal connection existed between the protected conduct 
and the adverse action. ” Bishop v. Bell Atl. Corp. , 299 
F.3d 53, 58 (1st Cir. 2002) . 
 5 
 “The MWPA and the MHRA do not contemplate 
separate whistleblower causes of action. Rather, the 
MHRA provides a cause of action to persons aggri eved 
by violations of the MWPA. ” Thayer , 2011 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 74229, 2011 WL 2682723 . 
 
 
 
 
B. Administrative Exhaustion and the Statute of 
Limitations under the MHRA and MWPA  
To begin, the Court resolves the parties ’ dispute over Mr. 
Ardito’s right to sue letter and his praecipe filed March 5, 2022, and t heir initial arguments that certain alleged 
adverse actions fall outside of the statute of limitations.  
  
 
1. Mark Ardito’s 2022 Right -To-Sue Letter  
SSP argues that Mr. Ardito’ s right -to-sue letter is an 
“irrelevant distraction[ ] ” from its motion to dismiss 
because he gave “no rationale to grant his request for 
judicial notice [of the right -to-sue letter] ” and has not 
filed a motion to amend his First Amended Complaint to 
inclu de the right -to-sue letter. Def.’s Opp’n to Praecipe  at 
1-2. In turn, Mr. Ardito contends that he has exhausted all 
administrative remedies and filed the right -to-sue letter 
with the Court as evidence of such. Pl.’s Reply to Def. ’s 
Opp’n to Praecipe  at 1. Mr. Ardito submits that the First 
Amended Complaint already contains all allegations that 
he brought before the MHRC, so upon issuance of the 
right -to-sue letter “such adverse actions are properly 
before this Court for resolution through his First 
Amended Complaint. ” Id. at 2. 
  
The MHRA6 provides that a plaintiff may not seek 
attorney’ s fees or damages under the Act “unless [he] 
alleges and establishes  that, prior to the filing of the civil 
action, [he] first filed a complaint with the commission 
and the commission ... [i]ssued a right -to-sue letter. ” 5 
M.R.S. § 4622(1)  (emphasi s added). The MHRA 
administrative exhaustion requirement is not a 
jurisdictional requirement but rather a condition precedent 
for recovery under the Act. Robertson v. Barber Foods, 
LLC, No. 2:19 -cv-00455 -NT, 2020 WL 3104047, 2020 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 102 437 (D. Me. June 11, 2020)  (citing 
5 M.R.S. § 4622 ; Burnett v. Ocean Props. Ltd. , 
2:16-cv-00359 -JAW, 2017 WL 1331134, at * ––––  2017 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 55059, at *22 (D. Me. Apr. 11, 2017) ); 
see also  Walton v. Nalco Chem. Co. , 272 F.3d 13, 20 -21 
(1st Cir. 2001)  (“[S]ection 4622 more closely resembles a 
condition precedent ” than an affirmative defense).  
 6 
 “Maine ... whistleblower protections laws contain the 
same administrative exhaustion requirement. ” Cole v. 
Maine , No. 1:17 -cv-00071 -JAW, 2018 WL 276682 at 
*–––– , 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 163857 at *47 (D. Me. 
Sept. 25, 2018)  (quoting Burnett v. Ocean Props. Ltd. , 
327 F. Supp. 3d 198, 232 (D. Me. 2018) ). 
 
 
To adequately plead a condition precedent, such as the 
MHRA administrative exhaustion requirement, a party 
must “allege generally that all conditions precedent have 
occurred or been performed. ” Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(c) ; see 
also 5A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Edward 
H. Cooper, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1302 (4th 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  14 
 ed. 2021)  (“Notwithstandin g variations among the states 
in pleading practice, Rule 9(c)  applies in all actions in the 
federal courts, even when the pleading practice in the 
state in which the court is sitting is different ”). Thus, the 
First Circuit has stated that “the appropr iate inquiry ... is 
whether either the original or amended complaint 
include[s] an adequate  ‘general averment ’ that [the 
plaintiff] had met all conditions precedent to the recovery 
of damages under the MHRA, even [if] neither complaint 
explicitly allege[s]  that [the plaintiff] ... filed an MHRC 
charge. ” Walton , 272 F.3d at 22  (emphasis in original).  
  
*15 Mr. Ardito’s First Amended Complaint expressly 
alleges that retaliation in t he form of SSP “fabricating 
information to issue negative performance evaluations in 
2021, stripping him of certain job duties to his detriment 
and stating that his current job duties have no promotional 
potential ” prompted him to file a second MHRC 
compla int on August 30, 2021. First Am. Compl.  ¶ 5. At 
the time of the First Amended Complaint, Mr. Ardito 
acknowledged that the MHRC had not yet granted him a 
right -to-sue letter on these claims, id., but he “proffer[ed 
in his opposition to the motion to dismis s] ... that no 
MHRC investigation will take place because of [his] 
stated intention [to the MHRC] to seek a Notice of Right 
to Sue at the expiration of the 180 -day deadline to include 
those adverse actions in this lawsuit for adjudication. ” 
Pl.’s Opp’n  at 7. Thus, it is clear through Mr. Ardito’s 
First Amended Complaint and his opposition to SSP’s 
motion to dismiss that he “placed [SSP] on reasonable 
notice that he was claiming compliance with section 
4622 ” pending receipt of the right -to-sue le tter, which he 
alleged he would receive at the end of February 2022. 
Walton , 272 F.3d at 23 ; see also  Stroudwater Assocs. v. 
Kirsch , No. 2:21 -cv-00086 -NT, 2021 WL 5815910 at 
*12, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23400 0 at *39 -40 (D. Me. 
Dec. 7, 2021)  (crediting plaintiffs with putting the 
defendant “and the Court on Notice that [employment 
discrimination] claims were coming down the pike ” 
before receiving their right -to-sue letter). Mr. Ardito has 
thus provided SSP with notice that he filed a charge of 
discrimination with the MHRC and pled the condition 
precedent to seek attorney’s fees or damages.  
  
Although Mr. Ardito could not establish exhaustion at the 
time of filing the First Amended Complaint, because the 
180-day period had not yet lapsed, the Notice of Right to 
Sue issued March 1, 2022, nonetheless establishes 
exhaustion because it is the type of extrinsic document the 
Court may consider in resolving the pending motion to 
dismiss the First Amended Complaint.  
  
In deciding a motion to dismiss “a court may not 
[ordinarily] consider any documents that are outside of the complaint, or not expressly incorporated therein, 
unless the motion is converted into one for summary 
judgment. ” Alt. Energy, Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine 
Ins. Co. , 267 F.3d 30, 33 (1st Cir. 2001)  (citing Watterson 
v. Page , 987 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 1993) ). There is a “narrow 
exception ‘for documents the authentici ty of which are 
not disputed by the parties; for official public records; for 
documents central to plaintiffs ’ claim; or for documents 
sufficiently referred to in the complaint. ’ ” Id. (quoting 
Watterson , 987  F.2d at 3 ); see also  Foley v. Wells Fargo 
Bank, N.A. , 772 F.3d 63, 74 (1st Cir. 2014)  (same); Doe v. 
Pawtucket Sch. Dep’t , 969 F.3d 1, 8 (1st Cir. 2020)  
(enumerating exceptions recognized by the First Circuit). 
When an exception is met, the extrinsic document 
“effectively merges into the pleadings and the trial court 
can review it in deciding a motion to dismiss under Rule 
12(b)(6) .” Beddall v. State St. Bank & Tr. Co. , 137 F.3d 
12, 17 (1st Cir. 1998) . 
  
Notably, the First Circuit has held that a right -to-sue letter 
falls within the parameters of the narrow Alternative 
Energy  exception. See Jorge v. Rumsfeld , 404 F.3d 556, 
559 (1st Cir. 2005)  (explaining on a motion to dismiss 
that the district court properly considered a right -to-sue 
letter forming the basis of a plaintiff’s administrative 
exhaustion claim even thoug h it was not “annexed ” to the 
complaint). As such, the Court may consider Mr. Ardito’s 
March 1, 2022, right -to-sue letter as part of the First 
Amended Complaint. Furthermore, SSP does not dispute 
that the Court may properly consider the right -to-sue 
letter  without converting the motion to dismiss into one 
for summary judgment. See Def. ’s Opp’n to Pl. ’s 
Praecipe  at 2 ( “SSP does not dispute that the 
Right -to-Sue letter is such a ‘source ’ that, if relevant to 
SSP’s Motion to Dismiss, the Court could consider 
without ‘converting ’ the Motion to Dismiss ‘into a motion 
for summary judgment ’ ” (quoting Freeman v. Town of 
Hudson , 714 F.3d 29, 36 (1st Cir. 2013) ). Considering the 
right -to-sue letter as incorporated in the Fi rst Amended 
Complaint, Mr. Ardito has both sufficiently alleged and 
established that he has met the administrative exhaustion 
requirements pursuant to Rule 9(c) . The Court may 
therefore consider the allegations in the 2021 MHRC 
complaint, as detailed in Mr. Ardito’s First Amended 
Complaint, in resolving the pending motion to dismiss.  
  
*16 To the extent that SSP argues that “[Mr.] Ardito has 
not sought leave to inject his latest allegations against 
SSP into this case through another amendment, ” id., Mr. 
Ardito says that the “adverse actions [which are the 
subject of the new right -to-sue letter] have already been 
inclu ded in his First Amended Complaint for 
expediency. ” Pl.’s Reply to Def. ’s Obj. to Praecipe  at 2. 
The Court agrees. Mr. Ardito does not seek to add any 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  15 
 new allegations to the First Amended Complaint save 
notification that he received the right -to-sue letter , which, 
as the Court previously noted, may be incorporated into 
the First Amended Complaint by way of the Alternative 
Energy  exception. Mr. Ardito need not amend his First 
Amended Complaint solely to state that he has exhausted 
his administrative  remedies, when the Court may already 
otherwise consider the right -to-sue letter itself. The Court 
concludes that Mr. Ardito has alleged administrative 
exhaustion.  
  
 
 
C. Whether Alleged Retaliatory Actions in 2017 and 
2018 are Subject to the MHRA & MWPA Statute of 
Limitations  
SSP contends that Mr. Ardito’s allegations that it denied 
him a job transf er, denied him a promotion, and forced the 
transfer of his clients in 2017 and 2018 should be 
dismissed because they fall outside of the statute of 
limitations as more than two years passed between when 
the alleged acts occurred and when Mr. Ardito 
commenc ed this action. Def.’s Mot.  at 10. Specifically, 
SSP says that the Court should “analyze each alleged 
discriminatory or retaliatory act ” to determine whether 
each allegation falls within the statute of limitations 
period. Id. at 11 . Mr. Ardito contends that because he 
grounds his complaint in a retaliatory hostile work 
environment, actions that would not be considered 
“materially adverse ” standing alone “may collectively 
amount to a retaliatory hostile work enviro nment. ” Pl.’s 
Opp’n  at 16. He further alleges that even if some of the 
actions underlying his claim fall outside the applicable 
statutory period, they still support liability under a 
“continuing violations ” theory. Id. 
  
The MHRA provides that “[t]he actio n must be 
commenced not more than ... 2 years after the act of 
unlawful discrimination complained of. ”7 5 M.R.S. § 
4613(2)(C) . The “two-year limitation period begins to run 
when an employee receives ‘unambiguous and 
authoritative notice of the discriminatory act. ’ ” 
Berounsky v. Oceanside Rubbish, Inc. , 2022 ME 3, ¶ 9, 
266 A.3d 284  (quoting LePage v. Bath Iron Works Corp ., 
2006 ME 130, ¶ 15, 909 A.2d 629 ). “The discriminatory 
act needs to ‘have a degree of permanence, sufficient to 
put a reasonable claimant on notice of discrimination, ’ 
and ‘[m]ere suspicion and rumor are insufficient. ’ ” Id. 
(quoting Lepage,  2006 ME 130, ¶ 11, 909 A.2d 629 ). 
 7 
 MWPA claimants are subject to the same pre -filing 
arbitration requirements and statute of limitations. See 
26 M.R.S. § 834 -A; Faile v. Maine , No. 1:12-CV-00055 -JAW, 2012 WL 3990003 at *7, 2012 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 128944 at *20 -21 (D. Me. Aug. 6, 
2012)  (“Claims of discrimination that are advanced 
under the MHRA/MWPA must be commenced within 
two years of the act of unlawful discrimination unless a 
later filing date is allowed by virtue of the delay 
occasioned by an administrative process ” (citing 5 
M.R.S. §§ 4613(2)(C) , 4622(1) )). 
 
 
However, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court 
“distinguishe[s] claims arising from discrete acts of 
discrimination from claims arising from a hostile work 
environment involving an aggregation of a serie s of acts 
in which the “ ‘unlawful employment practice ” ... cannot 
be said to occur on any particular day. ’ ” LePage , 2006 
ME 130, ¶ 12, 909 A.2d 629  (quoting Nat’l R.R. 
Passenger Corp. v. Morgan , 536 U.S . 101, 111, 122 S.Ct. 
2061, 153 L.Ed.2d 106 (2002) ); see also  Franchina , 881 
F.3d at 47  (“Hostile work environment claims ... generally 
do not turn on single acts but on an aggregation of hostile 
acts extending over a period of time. For this reason, an 
equitable exception to the 300 -day filing period is 
recognized under Title VII for the ongoing patterns of 
discrimination that are part and parcel with hostile work 
environment claims ”); Tobin v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. , 553 
F.3d 121, 130 (1st Cir. 2009)  (“[A] hostile work 
environment claim cannot be said to occur on any 
particular day ” because “the actionable wrong is the 
environment not the individual acts that, taken together, 
create the environment ” (quoting Ledbetter v. The 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. , 550 U.S. 618, 638, 127 
S.Ct. 2162, 167 L.Ed.2d 982 (2007) )). Where a plaintiff 
has alleged a hostile work environment, rather than 
discrimination or retaliation by discrete acts, “it doe s not 
matter ... that some of the alleged acts fall outside the 
statutory time period, so long as an act that forms part of 
the basis of the claim occurs within the period. ” Willey v. 
Cty. of York , No. CV -15-0120, 2017 WL 6513584 at *4, 
2017 Me. Supe r. LEXIS 182 at *9 (Me. Super. Ct. Oct. 
10, 2017)  (citing Morgan , 536 U.S. at 117, 122 S.Ct. 
2061 ); see also  Cordero -Suárez v. Rodríguez , 689 F.3d 
77, 82 (1st Cir. 20 12).8 
 8 
 In the alternativ e, Mr. Ardito argues that the continuing 
violations doctrine saves his claims from being 
time-barred. “[T]he continuing violations doctrine 
applies where ‘a number of discriminatory acts emanate 
from the same discriminatory animus, [with] each act 
constitu ting a separate wrong actionable under Title 
VII.” Thomas v. Eastman Kodak Co. , 183 F.3d 38, 54 
(1st Cir. 1999)  (quoting Jensen v. Frank , 912 F.2d 517, 
522 (1st Cir. 1993) ). In O’Rourke v. City of Providence , 
the First Circuit explained that “there is a natural 
affinity between the hostile work environment theory 
and the  continuing violation doctrine ... [y]et the two 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  16 
 theories are not the same and not every hostile work 
environment claim presents a plausible continuing 
violation. ” 235 F.3d at 727 . The O’Rourke  Court 
“decline[d] to adopt a per se rule that a properly alleged 
hostile work environment claim also constitutes a 
continuing violation. ” Id. at 727 -28. The Law Court has 
not definitively resolved whether the continui ng 
violations doctrine is cognizable under Maine law, see 
McKinnon v. Honeywell Intern., Inc.  2009 ME 69, ¶ 14, 
977 A.2d 420  (“Although [the Law Court has] 
discussed the possible applicability of the [continuing 
violations] doctrine in the context  of employment 
discrimination ... [it has] never adopted the continuing 
violations doctrine as a means of tolling the statute of 
limitations ”), but the Court need not resolve that issue 
here because of the nature of Mr. Ardito’s claim. The 
actionable wrong  Mr. Ardito alleges is the hostile work 
environment itself, rather than SSP’s discrete acts or a 
serial violation. Thus, Mr. Ardito’s underlying claim 
bypasses the need to address and apply the continuing 
violations doctrine.  
Even if the Court had to apply  the continuing violations 
doctrine, Mr. Ardito’s claim would still survive 
dismissal because SSP’s actions could be considered a 
“serial violation. ” See Thomas , 183 F.3d at 53 . 
Accepting Mr. Ardito’s allegations  as true, each of 
SSP’s allegedly retaliatory acts could be described as 
“emanating from the same discriminatory animus ” of 
punishing Mr. Ardito for reporting what he perceived to 
be illegal conduct by SSP employees. Moreover, 
because Mr. Ardito made a ser ies of reports over time, 
it could plausibly have taken time for him to foresee 
that SSP’s actions created a pattern of repeated 
retaliatory acts. See id. at 54  (“The continuing violation 
doctrine ensures that th ese plaintiffs ’ claims are not 
foreclosed merely because the plaintiffs needed to see a 
pattern of repeated acts before they realized that the 
individual acts were discriminatory ”). 
 
 
*17 Here, Mr. Ardito filed his claim in state superior 
court on February 17, 2021. SSP is therefore correct that 
all discrete  retaliatory acts predating February 17, 2019, 
are time barred. Importantly, however, Mr. Ardito present 
a claim for a retaliatory hostile work environment rather 
than discrete retaliatory occurrences. Specifically, Mr. 
Ardito contends that SSP retaliated against him by 
creating a hostile work environment beginning in 2018 
but continuing until 2021. In other words, the occurrences 
underlying the alleged hostile work envi ronment fall both 
inside and outside the two -year statute of limitations. 
Because some of the alleged actions would not be time 
barred as discrete incidences, all alleged actions that 
constitute a continuing hostile work environment may be 
considered in th is action. See id.  
  
Although the Law Court has not definitively resolved 
whether retaliatory  hostile work environment claims are cognizable under Maine law, as discussed in greater detail 
below, the Court concludes that the Law Court would 
likely recognize a retaliatory hostile work environment 
claim if faced with the question. Because the allege d 
wrong that Mr. Ardito challenges is the working 
environment itself, the Court concludes that SSP’s acts 
that Mr. Ardito says constitute a pattern of retaliation are 
alleged as part of a hostile work environment rather than 
as discrete acts. As a result t hey are not time barred.  
  
 
 
D. Mark Ardito’s MWPA and MHRA Claims  
The Court must next consider whether Mr. Ardito has 
stated plausible claims for violations of the MWPA and 
MHRA. Although Mr. Ardito need not allege a prima 
facie case to survive dismissal at this stage, the Court 
looks to the prima facie elements as a fra mework for its 
analysis. The Court therefore considers whether Mr. 
Ardito has plausibly alleged (1) a protected activity; (2) 
an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal link 
between the protected activity and adverse employment 
action.  
  
 
1. Protected Activity  
Under Maine law, an employee engages in a protected 
activity if he “reports orally or in writing to the employer 
... what the employee has reasonable cause to believe is a 
violation of a law or rule adopted under the laws of this 
State, a political subdivision of this State or the United 
States. ” 26 M.R.S. § 833(1)(A) . To fall within the 
purview of the MWPA, “the employee must first bring 
‘the alleged violation,  condition or practice to the 
attention of a person having supervisory authority with 
the employer ’ and ‘allow [ ] the employer a reasonable 
opportunity to correct that violation, condition or practice 
unless the employee has specific reason to believe tha t the 
reports to the employer will not result in correction of the 
violation. ” Osher , 703 F. Supp. 2d at 66 n.15  (quoting 26 
M.R.S. § 833(2) ). “[T]he complained -of-conduct need not 
actually be illegal, but the employee must prove that a 
reasonable person might have believed that it was. ” Id. at 
66 (quoting Tripp v. Cole , 425 F.3d 5, 9 (1st Cir. 2005) ). 
However, the re port must be made in good faith. See Hall 
v. Mid -State Machine Prods. , No. 11 -CV-068, 2013 WL 
5510308 at * –––– , 2013 Me. Super. LEXIS 169 at *15 -16 
(Me. Super. Ct. Sept. 4, 2013)  (citing Gammon v. Crisi s 
& Counseling Ctrs. , 762 F. Supp. 2d 165, 182 -83 (D. Me. 
2011) ). “The good faith analysis begins with an 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  17 
 assessment ‘of whether the purported whistleblower made 
h[is] complaints for the purpose of exposing illegal or 
unsafe practices. ’ ” Id. at *16 (qu oting Gammon , 762 F. 
Supp. 2d at 183 ). In its motion to dismiss, SSP does not 
dispute that Mr. Ardito engaged in a protected activity but 
it reserves the right to contest that point later. Def.’s Mot.  
at 8 n. 4. 
  
For the purposes of this motion to dismiss, the Court 
agrees that Mr. Ardito has properly alleged a protected 
activity. First, Mr. Ardito made several reports, both 
orally and in writing, to his direct supervisors, including 
to Ms. Tong, Mr. Wood, Mr.  Sanner, and Mr. Houtappel 
about conduct of SSP employees. See First  Am. Compl.  
¶¶ 33-34, 38 -39, 69 -70, 90. He also reported to Ms. 
Reganall in HR, and spoke with Mr. Srinivasan and Ms. 
Ho in their capacities as SSP’s attorneys. Id. ¶¶ 44 -46, 
69, 76, 89 -90. In other words, Mr. Ardito has more than 
sufficiently alleged that he brought his concerns to the 
attention to his superiors. See Valentin -Almeyda , 447 F.3d 
at 94  (holding that administrative complaints and oral 
complaints to supervisors constitute “protected activity ”). 
  
*18 Mr. Ardito has also alleged th at he reasonably 
believed that Ms. Tong and her other direct reports were 
engaged in illegal conduct. Based on Mr. Ardito’s 
knowledge and understanding of the NDAs and the nature 
of the confidential information provided to SSP by its 
customers, it was reas onable for Mr. Ardito to believe that 
an apparent breach of such an agreement may be in 
violation of federal or state law. See Tripp , 425 F.3d at 9  
(“[T]he complained -of conduct need not actually  be 
illegal, but th e employee must prove that a reasonable 
person might have believed that it was ”) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (emphasis in original); Thayer , 
2011 WL 2682723, at * ––––  2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 
74229, at *64  (“[Plaintiff] need not have identifie d in his 
Complaint what law he believes was violated since all 
that is required is his good faith belief ‘that it crosses the 
line’ when he complained to the employer —not whether 
such a belief was legally correct ”). Furthermore, in his 
email to Mr. Wood in  September 2018, Mr. Ardito stated 
that he was raising his concerns with his superiors to 
shield SSP and himself from liability. First Am. Compl.  ¶ 
63. Taking these facts as true, it is reasonable to conclude 
that Mr. Ardito made the reports and disclosure s in good 
faith belief that the complained of conduct was illegal.  
  
Finally, Mr. Ardito has sufficiently alleged that he gave 
SSP sufficient time and opportunity to correct the alleged 
misconduct. Mr. Ardito’s first disclosure was made to Ms. 
Tong and Mr.  Sanner in January 2018 and he escalated 
his disclosures in May 2018 by contacting the SSP legal 
department. Mr. Ardito alleges that he was not contacted by anyone from SSP until December 2018. Id. ¶ 91. Even 
assuming that Mr. Ardito’s first major disclosu re occurred 
in May 2018, a period of seven months is sufficient to 
establish that he gave SSP ample opportunity to address 
his concerns. Mr. Ardito has sufficiently alleged that he 
engaged in a protected activity.  
  
 
2. Adverse Employment Action  
Under the MWPA “[a]n adverse employment action is an 
action that materially changes the conditions of an 
employee’s employment, ” Sullivan , 2016 ME 107, ¶ 14, 
143 A.3d 1283 , and under the MHRA such an action is 
one that “could well dissuade a reasonable worker from 
making or supporting a charge of discrimination. ” 
Charette v. St. John Valley Soil & Water Conservation 
Dist. , 332 F. Supp.  3d 316, 356 (D. Me. 2018)  (citing 
Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White , 548 U.S. 53, 
57, 126 S.Ct. 2405, 165 L.Ed.2d 345 (2006) ). “An 
employee has suffered an adverse employment action 
when the employee has been deprived either of 
‘something of consequence ’ as a result of a demotion in 
responsibility, a pay reduction, or termination, or the 
employer has withheld “an accouterment of the 
employment relationship, say, by failing to follow a 
customary practic e of considering [the employee] for 
promotion after a particular period of service. ” LePage , 
2006 ME 130, ¶ 20, 909 A.2d 629  (quoting Blackie v. 
State of Maine , 75 F.3d 716, 725 (1st Cir. 1996) ). Here,  
Mr. Ardito contends that he “is not seeking relief for 
discrete adverse actions ” namely, denial of a job transfer, 
denial of a promotion, and the forced client account 
transfers. Pl.’s Opp’n  at 15 -16. Instead, he submits that 
these discrete acts “are part  of the pervasive orders to 
violate the law, castigation, intimidation and threats for 
Mr. Ardito’s refusal to violate the law, and other actions 
from May through December 2018. ” Id. at 16 . 
  
 
a. Whether Hostile Work Environment is a Cognizable 
“Adverse Action ” under the MHRA and MWPA  
As both parties note, the Law Court has “not yet 
addressed whether a hostile work environment claim ca n 
constitute an adverse employment action pursuant to the 
WPA. ” Blake v. State,  2005 ME 32, ¶ 10, 868 A.2d 234 ; 
see also  LaCourse v. HallKeen Mgmt., Inc. , No. 
2:10-cv-420-GZS, 2011 WL 3857149 at * –––– , 2011 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 98315 at *57 -59 (D. Me. Aug. 31, 
2011) ; Bodman , 787 F. Supp. 2d at 110  (“To date, 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  18 
 however, it re mains an open question in Maine whether a 
retaliatory hostile work environment (and resulting 
constructive discharge) constitutes an adverse 
employment action in the context of a MWPA claim ”); 
Doyle v. Dep’t of Hum. Servs. , 2003 ME 61, ¶ 24 n.14, 
824 A.2d 48  (“We do not reach DHS’s argument that the 
MHRA does not recognize a claim for a hostile work 
environment because, assuming that such a claim is 
cognizable, the undisputed facts do not demonstrate a 
hostile incident or incidents of sufficient se verity or 
pervasiveness to constitute a hostile work environment ”). 
  
*19 Because the Law Court has yet to decide this issue, 
SSP argues that “[t]his Court should not create new state 
law by recognizing this claim under the MWPA. ” Def.’s 
Mot. at 17. Although SSP is correct that “[i]t is not [the 
federal court’s] role to expand Maine law, ” Douglas , 433 
F.3d at 149 , the First Circuit has also stated that “[w]here 
the state’s highest court has not definitively weighed in, a 
federal court applying state law ‘may consider analogous 
decisions, consider[ ] dicta, scholarly works, and any 
other reliable data t ending convincingly to show how the 
highest court in the state would decide the issue at hand. ’ 
” Janney Montgomery Scott LLC v. Tobin , 571 F.3d 162, 
164 (1st Cir. 2009)  (quoting N. Am. Specialty Ins. Co. v. 
Lapalme , 258 F.3d 35, 38 (1st Cir. 2001) ). In such 
circumstances, the federal court “must ‘make an informed 
prophecy —to discern the rule the state’s highest court 
would be most likely to follow under these circumst ances, 
even if our independent judgment might differ. ’ ” Id. 
(quoting Lapalme , 258 F.3d at 38  (internal quotation 
marks omitted)).  
  
The Court acknowledges that this a complicated issue, 
however this is not the first time this District and the First 
Circuit have been faced with deciphering state law absent 
explicit guidance from the highest state court. See, e.g. , 
Noviello , 398 F.3d at 91  (looking to federal law  in the 
absence of precedent from the Massachusetts Supreme 
Judicial Court in determining whether Massachusetts law 
permitted claims for retaliatory hostile work 
environments); Thayer , 2011 WL 2682723, at * ––––  
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 74229, at *54 -55 (comparing 
federal law and Maine law on a motion to dismiss to 
resolve whether the MWPA applied to former employees, 
which was an open question under Maine law).  
  
Consistent with the First Circuit’s analysis in Noviello v. 
City of Boston , the Court first considers Title VII, the 
federal analogue of the MHRA and MWPA antiretaliation 
provisions. The Noviello  Court began by comparing the 
language of Title VII’s operative and anti -retaliation 
provisions. Noviello , 398 F.3d at 88 -90. The operative 
provision makes it unlawful “to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, 
conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such 
individual’s race, color, religion, se x or nation origin. ” 42 
U.S.C. § 2000e -2(a)(1) . Based on this language, and 
Congress ’ intent “ ‘to strike at the entire spectrum of 
disparate treatment ... in employment, which includes 
requiring people to work in a discrimin atorily hostile or 
abusive work environment ’ ” the First Circuit concluded 
that “the verb ‘discriminate ’ ... logically includes 
subjecting a person to a hostile work environment. ” 
Noviello , 389 F.3d at 90 (quoting Harris v. Forklift Sys., 
Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21, 114 S.Ct. 367, 126 L.Ed.2d 295 
(1993) ); see also  Thayer , 2011 WL 2682723, at *20 2011 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 74229, at *57  (discussing the “linguistic 
difference s between Title VII’s substantive 
antidiscrimination and anti -retaliation provisions ” as 
observed by the United States Supreme Court in 
Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White , 548 U.S. 53, 
62, 126 S.Ct. 2405, 165  L.Ed.2d 345 (2006) ). 
  
Turning to the language of Title VII’s anti -retaliation 
provision, which “directs an employer not to discriminate 
against any employee ‘because [the employee] has made a 
charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in 
an investigation, proceeding or hearing under [Title VII], ’ 
” Noviello , 389 F.3d at 90  (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 
2000e -3(a)), the First Circuit concluded that because the 
operative pr ovision of Title VII clearly stated Congress ’ 
intention to prevent discrimination in the form of a hostile 
work environment under the statute, it would be 
inapposite to read the anti -retaliation provision more 
restrictively. Id. (applying the cano n of interpretation that 
“[a] term appearing in several places in a statutory text is 
generally read the same way each time it appears ” 
(quoting Ratzlaf v. United States , 510 U.S. 135, 143, 114 
S.Ct. 655, 126 L.Ed .2d 615 (1994) )). 
  
*20 Indeed, the First Circuit reasoned that the 
anti-retaliation provision’s use of the word 
“discrimination ” without qualification was evidence that 
the provision intended to “prohibit any discrimin ation that 
is reasonably likely to deter protected activity, ” including 
subjecting an employee to a hostile work environment. Id. 
(quoting EEOC Compl. Man.  (CCH) P 8005, § 8-11.D.3 
(2004)). Importantly, when faced with whether 
Massachusetts law al so recognized a retaliatory hostile 
work environment, the First Circuit concluded that “the 
[Massachusetts] statute’s anti -discrimination and 
anti-retaliation provisions are very similar to the 
counterpart provisions contained in Title VII. ” Id. at 91 . 
The First Circuit concluded that “were the [SJC] squarely 
presented with the question, it would find a retaliatory 
hostile work environment to be an adverse employment 
action. ” Id. at 90 -91. 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  19 
   
Applying the First Circuit analytic approach, the Court 
concludes that if faced with the same question, the Law 
Court would likely permit a retaliatory hostile work 
environment claim based on the similarity of the MHRA 
and MWPA to bot h Title VII and the Massachusetts law9 
in Noviello . First, the same linguistic similarities that the 
First Circuit recognized between Title VII’s 
anti-retaliation provision and the Massachusetts law exist 
between Title VII and the MHRA and MWPA. The 
MHRA states that “[a] person may not di scriminate 
against any individual because that individual has 
opposed any act or practice that is unlawful under this Act 
or because that individual made a charge, testified, 
assisted or participated in any manner in an investigation, 
proceeding or hearing  under this Act. ” 5 M.R.S. § 
4633(a) . The MWPA similarly provides that “[n]o 
employer may discharge, threaten or otherwise 
discriminate against an employee regarding the 
employee’s compensation, terms, conditions, location or 
privileges of employme nt because ” the employee reported 
what they reasonably believed to be a violation of the law. 
26 M.R.S. § 833(1)(A) . 
 9 
 Chapter 151B of t he Massachusetts General Laws 
states that it is unlawful:  
For any person, employer, labor organization or 
employment agency to discharge, expel or otherwise 
discriminate against any person because he has 
opposed any practices forbidden under this chapter 
or because he has filed a complaint, testified or 
assisted in any proceeding under section five.  
Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B, § 4(4) . 
 
 
As in Title VII and Massachusetts Chapter 151B, the 
word “discriminate ” noticeably lacks a  qualifier in both 
the MHRA and MWPA. Moreover, the phrase “or 
otherwise discriminate ” in the MWPA suggests that the 
Maine Legislature, like Congress, did not mean to limit 
actionable types of retaliation solely to employee 
“discharge ” or “threat[s]. ” In fact, in LePage , the Law 
Court held that “[u]nlike 42 U.S.C.S. § 2000e -3(a), which 
simply prohibits ‘discrimination ’ in response to a 
protected activity, the MWPA specifically defines 
discrimination by stating that ‘[n]o employer may 
discharge, threaten  or otherwise discriminate against an 
employee regarding the employee’s compensation, terms, 
conditions, location or privileges of employment. ” Id. 
(emphasis in LePage ) (quoting 26 M.R.S. § 833(1) ). The 
Law Court thus interpreted the statutory language as 
being broader than Title VII, which is consistent with the 
reading the Court adopts here.  
  
This conclusion is further  consistent with the MHRC 
Rules and Regulations which provide that “[c]onsistent with the public policy underlying the Act (as expressed in 
§ 4552), and with firmly established principles for the 
interpretation of such humanitarian legislation, the 
remedia l provisions of the Act shall be given broad 
construction and its exceptions shall be construed 
narrowly. ” Me. Hum. Rts. Comm’n Reg.  ch. 3, § 1(3)(A); 
see also  Wells v. Franklin Broadcasting Corp. , 403 A.2d 
771, 7 73 (Me. 1979)  (“The legislative history of the 
[Maine Human Rights Act] indicates that it was meant to 
have very broad coverage ” (quoting Me. Hum. Rts. 
Comm’n v. Local 1361, Me. , 383 A.2d 369, 373 (1978) ). 
  
*21 Finally, this Court similarly concluded in Thayer 
Corporation v. Reed  that the MWPA should be broadly 
construed. In Thayer , the Court relied on Burlington 
Northern  to conclude that a narrow interpretation of 
Maine’s anti -retaliation provision would foreclose an 
entire category of plaintiffs, a result inconsistent with the 
purpose of statutory antiretaliation provisions. 2011 WL 
2682723, at * ––––  2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 74229, at 
*58-60. The Court noted that in Burlington Northern , the 
Supreme Court characterized Title VII’s antiretaliation 
provision as a means to prevent discrimination by 
“preventing an employer from interfering (through 
retaliation) with an employee’s efforts to secure or 
advance enforcement of the Act’s basic guarantees. ” Id. at 
*58 (quoting Burlington N. , 548 U.S. at 63, 126 S.Ct. 
2405 ) (alteration in Thayer ). The Court explained that the 
Supreme Court cons trued the antiretaliation provision 
broadly to “deter the many forms that effective retaliation 
can take. ” Id. at *59 (quoting Burlington N. , 548 at 63, 
126 S.Ct. 2405 ). The Court ultimately concluded that “the 
same justifications the Burlin gton Northern  Court 
identified for the Title VII antiretaliation provision’s 
broad protection apply to the MWPA and these 
protections would be hollow if an employer were free to 
exact retaliation against whistleblowers outside of 
employment. ” Id. at *60 . 
  
In light of the Supreme Court’s reasoning in Burlington 
Northern , and the First Circuit’s reasoning in Noviello , 
and given the purpose of the comparable Title VII and 
Maine antiretaliation provisions, the Court concludes that 
a hostile work environment may be an actionable adverse 
employment action. A narrow construction of the MWPA 
and MHRA would allow an employer to retaliate against 
an employee in small continuous ways as long as the 
action did not arise to the level of a discrete retaliatory 
act. This would render the antiretaliation provision hollow 
if an employer could legally make a work envi ronment 
unpleasant in small but potentially meaningful ways over 
an extended period of time and then use the statute of 
limitations period as a shield against potentially 
meritorious employee claims.  
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  20 
   
Finally, the Law Court has consistently interpreted th e 
MWPA and MHRA with reference to Title VII. Currie , 
2007 ME 12, ¶ 13, 915 A.2d 400  (noting that the Law 
Court’s “construction of the MHRA and WPA has been 
guided by federal law ” including Title VII, in the absence 
of Law Court precedent); see als o Gammon , 762 F. Supp. 
2d at 182  (“The MWPA analysis is guided by federal case 
law construing analogous statutes ”); LePage , 2006 ME 
130, ¶ 19, 909 A.2d 629  (citing the Law Court’s adoption 
of the McD onnell Douglas  burden shifting analysis as an 
example of how the Law Court looks to federal caselaw); 
Winston v. Me. Technical Coll. Sys. , 631 A.2d 70, 74 -75 
(Me. 1993)  (“We have stated that because the MHRA 
gene rally tracks federal anti -discrimination statutes, it is 
appropriate to look to federal precedent for guidance in 
interpreting the MHRA ”). In particular, the Law Court 
has articulated that:  
In enacting the Human Rights Act, Maine was 
legislating against th e background of prior federal 
anti-discrimination statutes and a developing body of 
case law construing and applying those statutes. Over 
the years the federal cases have formulated a special 
methodology for evaluating the evidence introduced in 
cases of a lleged unlawful employment discrimination. 
As we have previously held, the Maine legislature -- by 
adopting provisions that generally track the federal 
anti-discrimination statutes -- intended the courts to 
look to the federal case law to provide significa nt 
guidance in the construction of our statute.  
Me. Hum. Rts. Comm’n v. City of Auburn , 408 A.2d 1253, 
1261 (Me. 1979)  (internal quotation marks omitted).10 In 
fact, the Law Court has stated that “[t]he special rules 
developed by the federal courts provide ‘a sensible, 
orderly way to evaluate the evidence in light of common 
experience as it bears  on the critical question of 
discrimination. ’ ” Id. at 1261  (quoting Furnco Constr. Co. 
v. Waters , 438 U.S. 567, 577, 98 S.Ct. 2943, 57 L.Ed.2d 
957 (1978) ). In su m, interpreting the MHRA and MWPA 
as permitting a retaliatory hostile work environment claim 
is consistent with precedent from the Law Court and this 
District. See Thayer , 2011 WL 2682723, at *21 2011 U.S. 
Dist. LEXIS 74229, at *59 -60 (“As such, the same 
justifications the Burlington Northern  Court identified for 
the Title VII antiretaliation provision’s broad protection 
apply to the MWPA and these protections would be 
hollow if an employer were free to exact retaliation 
against whistleblowers outside of employment ”). 
 10 
 In Moon v. Webber Oil Co. , No. 7 -126-B-W, 2008 WL 
130361, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 2287 (D. Me. Ja n. 10, 
2008) , aff’d  2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 8745 (D. Me. Feb. 
5, 2008), this District noted that the Law Court rejected 
a recommendation that federal precedent be applied to ambiguous statutory language in the MHRA. Id. at 
*5-6. The Moon  court st ated that “City of Auburn  and 
subsequent Maine Law Court cases have merely 
concluded that the state courts will look to federal 
precedent in situations where the federal statutory law 
and state statutory law are analogous. ” Id. The Court’s 
relianc e on City of Auburn  here is consistent with 
Moon , as the Court is not presented with ambiguous 
statutory language, but is instead tasked with 
interpreting a provision of Maine law that runs parallel 
to federal law.  
 
 
*22 In light of these factors, the Court finds it appropriate 
to treat Mr. Ardito’s hostile work environment retaliation 
claim as cognizable in resolving this motion to dismiss. 
To the extent that there is uncertainty as to how the Law 
Court would interpret this question “the Court will not 
foreclose a broad category of cases by deciding that [an] 
employee cannot engage in protected activity and suffer 
adverse employment action ” through a retaliatory hostile 
work environment. Id. at *61.  
  
 
b. Application  
The Court concludes that Mr. Ardito has plausibly alleged 
a retaliatory hostile work environment and thus survives 
dismissal. “Hostile environment claims involv e repeated 
or intense harassment sufficiently severe or pervasive to 
create an abusive working environment. ” Doyle , 2003 ME 
61, ¶ 23, 824 A.2d 48  (citing Nat’l R.R. Passenger Corp. , 
536 U.S. at 115 -16, 12 2 S.Ct. 2061 ). “In determining 
whether an actionable hostile work environment claim 
exists, we look to ‘all the circumstances, ’ including ‘the 
frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; 
whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or  a 
mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably 
interferes with an employee’s work performance. ’ ” Id. 
(quoting Nat’l R.R. Passenger Corp. , 536 U.S. at 115 -16, 
122 S.Ct. 2061 ). Additionally, “[t]he [C]ourt must 
determine whether the environment was subjectively 
abusive to the employee, and, in addition, whether that 
environment was hostile or abusive pursuant to an 
objective standard. ” Blake , 2005 ME 32, ¶ 9, 868 A.2d 
234. 
  
The First Circuit described the hostile work environment 
inquiry as “distinguish[ing] between the ordinary, if 
occasionally unpleasant, vicissitudes of the workplace and 
actual harassment. ” Noviello , 398 F.3d at 92  (citing  
Faragher v. City of Boca Raton , 524 U.S. 775, 788, 118 
S.Ct. 2275, 141 L.Ed.2d 662 (1998) ). In other words, 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  21 
 “rudeness or ostracism, standing alone, usually is not 
enough to support a hostile work environment c laim. ” Id. 
  
A court’s analysis of retaliatory harassment is “more 
nuanced ” because “[t]he very act of filing a charge 
against a coworker will invariably cause tension and 
result in a less agreeable workplace. ” Id. at 93 . As a 
result, “actions that are hurtful to a complainant only 
because coworkers do not take [his] side in a work -related 
dispute may not be considered as contributing to a 
retaliatory hostile work environment. ” Id. Rather, “[i]t is 
only those actions, directed at a complainant, that stem 
from a retaliatory animus which may be factored into the 
hostile work environment calculus. ” Id. As to the 
supervisor -supervisee relationship, the Law Court stated:  
The relationship betwe en a supervisor and an employee 
by its very nature involves a certain amount of tension, 
and at times, may even generate some hostility. A 
supervisor must be able to exert authority when 
interacting with a subordinate. In order to demonstrate 
a hostile wor k environment in the case of a 
supervisor -subordinate, the subordinate must show that 
the hostility was severe or pervasive, and that it 
extended beyond the normal tension that exists in many 
supervisor -supervisee relationships.  
Blake , 2005 ME 32, ¶ 10, 868 A.2d 234 . 
  
Mr. Ardito points to several grievances that he believes 
created a hostile work environment, including: (1) SSP 
refusing to hire him for the west coast position and 
refusing to give him oversight over its new hire in that 
position, Mr. West; (2) the system atic stripping of Mr. 
Ardito’s customers and his assignment to less significant 
clients; (3) SSP “gaslighting ” Mr. Ardito by either failing 
to respond to his complaints or denying that he ever made 
a complaint; (4) SSP’s issuance of the demand letter to 
Mr. Ardito’s daughter; and (5) an unfavorable 
employment review in January of 2021.  
  
*23 One view is that SSP’s alleged conduct amounts to 
nothing more than the type of “petty slights or minor 
annoyances that often take pla ce at work and that all 
employees experience. ” Billings v. Town of Grafton , 515 
F.3d 39, 54 (1st Cir. 2008)  (quoting Burlington Northern , 
548 U.S. at 68, 126 S.Ct. 2405 ). However, “cumulatively 
these allegations plausibly paint a picture that would 
allow a factfinder to find [SSP’s] conduct sufficient to 
deter a reasonable person from challenging [SSP’s 
confidentiality and trade secrets] practices had [he] 
known[he] woul d be subjected to these abuses if 
successful. ” Rodr íguez-Vives v. P.R. Firefighters Corps of 
P.R., 743 F.3d 278, 285 (1st Cir. 2014)  (citing Burlington 
Northern , 548 U.S . at 68, 126 S.Ct. 2405 ). Ultimately, 
whether SSP’s conduct falls outside of the scope of anti-retaliation laws or whether it constitutes a hostile 
work environment requires additional development of the 
record, rendering dismissal inappropriate at this  time.  
  
Although the Court construes Mr. Ardito’s hostile work 
environment allegations cumulatively, several specific 
allegations bear note. First, Mr. Ardito alleges that he was 
passed over for the west coast position initially offered to 
him, he was nev er given supervisory responsibility over 
Mr. West, despite SSP’s promise to grant him supervising 
authority, SSP systematically transferred his clients away 
to Mr. West, he was assigned to less high -profile accounts 
with little promotional opportunity, and  over time, his 
involvement in the Steering Committee was reduced from 
20% to 3% and SSP restricted his access to Steering 
Committee information. First Am. Compl.  ¶¶ 36-37, 
128-129, 149. The First Circuit previously stated that a 
“change in an employee’s r esponsibilities, ” such as a 
refusal to promote, divestiture of significant 
responsibilities, or withholding of recognition, may 
constitute an adverse employment action. See 
Colón -Fontánez v. Mun. of San Juan , 660 F. 3d 17, 37, 42 
(1st Cir. 2011) ; Simas v. First Citizens’ Fed. Credit 
Union , 170 F.3d 37, 50 (1st Cir. 1999)  (concluding that a 
substantial divestment of responsibilities may constitute 
an adverse employment act ion).  
  
Mr. Ardito alleges that his customer base dwindled, SSP 
transferred nine out of his thirteen clients to Mr. West, 
and over time, he was assigned less prestigious clients. 
Accepting these facts as true, Mr. Ardito has alleged a 
substantial change in  his job responsibilities, especially as 
he set forth the important relationship at SSP between 
bonus and career advancement opportunities and the 
extent and prestige of his client base. First Am. Compl.  ¶¶ 
27-29. Similarly, Mr. Ardito states that he was t old at 
various points that he was no longer eligible for 
promotion and that, by the time he filed his action in state 
superior court, promotion was entirely “off the table. ” See 
id. ¶ 153. Considering Mr. Ardito’s contention that his 
client and career aspi rations were well documented over 
the course of his employment with SSP, a jury could 
reasonably conclude that these changes to his 
advancement prospects and client base contributed to a 
hostile work environment that would objectively dissuade 
an employee from reporting his employer’s perceived 
illegal conduct. This determination requires a holistic, 
fact-intensive review of the employee’s unique situation.  
  
Although the denial of a promotion may arise to the 
retaliatory level, courts have held that a chan ge in 
responsibilities is not adverse unless it affects the 
employee’s prior authority. See Colón -Fontánez , 660 F.3d 
at 42  (citing Simas , 170 F.3d at 50 ). This case req uires 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  22 
 further factual development to understand Mr. Ardito’s 
position and how it changed, his discussions with SSP 
regarding promotion, additional facts relating to the 
alleged transfer of clients, and whether Ms. Tong’s 
conduct went beyond the normal tens ions between 
supervisor and supervisee. However, the Court takes Mr. 
Ardito’s allegation as true for purposes of the motion to 
dismiss and the allegations on this point are sufficient to 
preclude dismissal.  
  
*24 Second, M r. Ardito alleges that upon returning from 
leave, he was required to choose between going back to 
his former job with a reduced client base or accepting a 
different job with an experimental product and 
responsibilities on the Steering Committee. First Am. 
Compl.  ¶ 119. Based on Mr. Ardito’s allegations, it is 
plausible that giving Mr. Ardito a choice between an 
experimental product or a reduced client load, SSP 
effectively forced Mr. Ardito to return to a less 
prestigious job with diminished responsibilitie s, which 
could constitute an adverse employment action. See 
Rodr íguez-Vives , 743 F.3d at 286  (comparing 
Morales -Vallellanes v. Potter , 605 F.3d 27, 38 (1st Cir. 
2010)  (holding on summary judgment that reassignment 
to duties which were not “more difficult, less prestigious, 
or objectively inferior ” was not an adverse employment 
action), with Tart v. Illinois Power Co. , 366 F.3d  461, 473 
(7th Cir. 2004)  (jury could have found adverse 
employment action where plaintiffs were reassigned to 
“jobs ... [that] involved far less skill and significantly 
harsher working conditions than the plaintiffs ’ prior 
positions ”)); Morales -Vallellanes , 605 F.3d at 38  (“In 
appropriate circumstances, disadvantageous work 
assignments may qualify as materially adverse ”); Billings , 
515 F.3d at 54  (“A jury could find that, as a result of [a] 
transfer, [the plaintiff] occupied an objectively less 
prestigious job, reporting to a lower ranked supervisor, 
enjoying much less contact wit h the Board, the Town, and 
members of the public, and requiring less experience and 
fewer qualifications ”); Depaolo v. GHM Portland Mar, 
LLC, No. 2:16 -cv-00468 -NT, 2018 WL 3822455 at 
*–––– , 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 135286 at *28 (D. Me. 
Aug. 10, 2018)  (concluding on summary judgment that a 
reasonable factfinder could conclude that an employee 
was “demoted, ” and thus subjected to an adverse 
employment action, where he was told that if he wanted 
to come back from FMLA leave he could only return in a 
general maintenance position). But see Tomasini v. U.S. 
Postal Serv. , No. 17 -1552 (MEL), 2022 WL 889863, at 
*26 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53817, at *71 (D.P.R. Mar. 
24, 2022)  (“[A] purely  lateral transfer, that is, a transfer 
that does not involve a demo tion in form or substance, 
cannot rise to the level of a materially adverse 
employment action ” (alteration in Tomasini ) (emphasis in original) (quoting Marrero v. Goya of P.R., Inc.  304 F.3d 
7, 23 (1st Cir. 2002) ). 
  
Third, Mr. Ardito alleges that his manager issued a 
negative performance evaluation after receiving praise 
from Steering Committee members, and after years of 
positive evaluations, consistently successful sales, and 
high-performance metrics. See First  Am. Compl.  ¶¶ 
139-143. Accepting Mr. Ardito’s assertions as true, such “ 
‘unwarranted ’ negative job evaluations may constitute an 
adverse employment action ” and would contribute to a 
hostile work environment when cumulatively viewed 
alongside his  other allegations. LaBrecque v. Mabus , No. 
2:14-cv-00357 -JAW, 2017 WL 650060 at * –––– , 2017 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21815 at *67 (D. Me. Feb. 16, 2017) . 
  
Finally, Mr. Ardito also alleges that SSP limited his travel 
opportunities, failed to respond to h is concerns for several 
months and subsequently insinuated that he had not made 
a complaint, praised Mr. West for sharing information 
while criticizing Mr. Ardito, disclosed personal 
information to Mr. Ardito’s daughter and her employer in 
the demand lette r, and otherwise berated Mr. Ardito and 
pressured him to engage in illegal conduct. Accepted as 
true and viewed cumulatively, these allegations plausibly 
constitute a hostile working environment in combination 
with the other allegations discussed above. See 
Rodr íguez-Vives , 743 F.3d at 285  (explaining that 
restricting an employee’s access to professional 
advancement opportunities could reasonably deter an 
employee from reporting illegal employer conduct (citing 
Burlington Northern , 548 F.3d at 69 )); Tomasini , 2022 
WL 889863 at *25, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53817 at 
*68-69 (“Discipline or a reprimand for the purposes of 
retaliation may constitute an advers e employment action 
if it was ‘undeserved ’ or ‘unfairly ’ imposed and if it 
carries ‘tangible consequences ’ ” (quoting Espinal v. 
Nat’l Grid NE Holdings 2, LLC , 794 F. Supp. 2d 285, 293 
(D. Mass. 2011) ). But s ee Bhatti v. Trs. of Bos. Univ. , 659 
F.3d 64, 73 (1st Cir. 2011)  (“[A] criticism that carries 
with it no consequences is not materially adverse and 
therefore not actionable ”). 
  
A reasonable person could find that such actions could 
reasonably interfere with an employee’s job and go 
beyond the normal unpleasantness of a work environment 
or tension between supervisor and supervisee. Moreover, 
it is plausible that an employee would be deterred from 
reporting perceived illegality if they knew they would be 
pressured to engage in conduct they perceived as illegal, 
their personal information would be disclosed to others 
without their knowledge and consent, they would be 
berated and crit icized by their supervisors, they would 
have job responsibilities and promotional opportunities 
Ardito v. Solvay, S.A., Slip Copy (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  23 
 taken away, and as a consequence, experience extreme 
job-related stress and anxiety. This is ultimately a 
question of fact that cannot be answered at this stage  in 
the proceedings. See Thayer , 2011 WL 2682723, at * ––––  
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 74229, at *44 . 
  
 
3. Causal Link  
*25 Finally, Mr. Ar dito has sufficiently alleged a causal 
link. “One way of showing causation is by establishing 
that the employer’s knowledge of the protected activity 
was close in time to the employer’s adverse action. ” 
Wyatt v. Cit y of Bos. , 35 F.3d 13, 16 (1st Cir. 1994) ; see 
also Taghavidinani v. Riverview Psychiatric Ctr. , No. 
1:16-cv-00208 -JDL, 2018 WL 1156287 at * –––– , 2018 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 35403 at *17 (D. Me. Mar. 5, 2018)  
(quoting Daniels v. Narraguagus Bay Health Care 
Facility , 2012 ME 80, 45 A.3d 722, 728 (Me. 2012) ). 
  
Here, Mr. Ardito sufficiently alleged a causal link 
between his various reports to SSP regarding his concerns 
about the inappropriate disclosures a nd NDA violations 
and SSP’s alleged retaliatory actions. First, Mr. Ardito 
alleges that in January 2018, he first informed Ms. Tong 
and Mr. Sanner of his concerns about misappropriation of 
confidential information. It was this same month that Mr. 
West was hired for the west coast position instead of Mr. 
Ardito. It was also around this same time that SSP 
allegedly began to strip Mr. Ardito of his customers and 
reassign him to lower profile clients. It is unclear from the 
First Amended Complaint whether the a lleged retaliatory 
actions occurred before or after Mr. Ardito reported his 
concerns, which is itself sufficient justification for the 
Court’s denial of this pending motion. However, based on 
the pleadings, a reasonable person could conclude that 
these eve nts occurred in close proximity.  
  
Mr. Ardito also made additional reports in the summer of 
2018 and in October 2018, and he alleges that around this time he was criticized, his job changed and his client base 
dwindled. First Am. Compl.  ¶¶ 60-61. Furthermo re, it was 
in March 2020, three weeks after SSP attempted to 
expedite the MHRC process, that SSP sent a demand 
letter to Mr. Ardito’s daughter and her law firm. Again, 
from the First Amended Complaint, Mr. Ardito has 
alleged the retaliatory conduct occurre d in close 
proximity to his reports. Finally, Mr. Ardito alleges that it 
was only after he testified at the MHRC hearing that he 
received a negative performance review and that the CEO 
“changed his mind ” about Mr. Ardito’s involvement in 
the Steering Commi ttee. For the purposes of dismissal, 
Mr. Ardito has sufficiently alleged a causal connection.  
  
 
 
VI. SUMMARY  
The Court concludes that Mr. Ardito has plausibly alleged 
a claim for a retaliatory hostile work environment under 
the MWPA and MHRA.  
  
 
 
VII. CONCLUSION  
The Court OVERRULES Solvay Specialty Polymers 
USA, LLC’s objections to Mark Ardito’s Praecipe (ECF 
No. 32) and DENIES Solvay Specialty Polymers U SA, 
LLC’s motion to dismiss Mark Ardito’s First Amended 
Complaint (ECF No. 25).  
  
SO ORDERED.  
  
All Citations  
Slip Copy, 2022 WL 2132368  
 
End of Document  
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  
 
 
 
 
