TESTIMONY OF MAINE EMPLOYMENT LAWYERS ASSOCIATION 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1001 
My name is Chad Hansen. I am an attorney with Employee Rights Group and here on behalf of 
the Maine Employment Lawyers Association (MELA). MELA is the largest organization of civil rights 
lawyers in Maine with about 75 member attorneys who represent employees in labor and employment 
matters across the state as at least 2/3 oftheir practice. I have been practicing labor and employment 
law for 19 years here in Maine. 
MELA opposes LD1001 because it would adversely impact the rights of Maine employees and, in 
particular, would take away the right to have the Maine Human Rights Commission (MHRC) investigate 
charges ofdiscrimination and retaliation in employment. 
The bill is at odds with the Maine Human Rights Act (MHRA) itself and the purpose of the MHRC 
as set out in the MHRA which states: 
The commission has the duty of investigating all conditions and practices within the State which 
allegedly detract from the enjoyment, by each inhabitant of the State, of full human rights and personal 
dignity. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it has the duty of investigating all forms of 
invidious discrimination, whether carried out legally or illegally, and whether by public agencies or 
private persons. Based on its investigations, it has the further duty to recommend measures calculated to 
promote the full enjoyment of human rights and personal dignity by all the inhabitants of this State. 
LD 1001 would undercut this core purpose of the MHRC and permit the agency to bypass 
investigation of any charges of discrimination or investigate some charges but not others without any 
guidance on which to investigate. The bottom line is that it takes investigation of charges to determine 
whether discrimination or retaliation occurred. Taking away the investigation makes no sense. 
For employees, if LD1001 passes, the process could be limited to ﬁling a charge and then 
receiving a letter saying it was dismissed with nothing further. For pro se complainants the investigation 
is typically their only "day in court” and regardless of the MHRC's ﬁnding the investigation provides for 
some understanding and feeling that the State has taken their reports seriously. 
Furthermore, in many cases, employees and their attorneys ﬁle a charge and then learn about 
the merits of the case through the MHRC investigation and can determine whether it would be 
appropriate for the case to go into court. Eliminating the investigation would mean that employees and 
their attorneys would need to go straight to court more often, increasing the volume of cases being ﬁled 
in the courts and in particular the state courts which are already overburdened. 
For these reasons, MELA opposes the passage of LD 1001 and asks that the Committee vote 
”ought not to pass."
