§_ Littler Mendelson, P.C. 
Portland, ME 04101 
Steven J. Silver 
207.699.1130 direct 
207.774.6001 main 
207.358.2636 fax 
ssilver@littIer.com 
March 21, 2023 
BY HAND DELIVERY 
Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: L.D. 1001 - An Act to Amend the Maine Human Rights Act Regarding Right-to —sue 
Letters 
Dear Chairs Carney and Moonen: 
My name is Steve Silver. I am a resident of South Portland, an attorney at the law ﬁrm of Littler 
Mendelson, and an adjunct professor at the University of Maine School of Law. I am here today 
to testify in support of L.D. 1001. 
This legislation is necessary due to recent rulings by the United States District Court for the District 
of Maine permitting litigants to sidestep exhausting their administrative remedies with the Maine 
Human Rights Commission and rush to Court. LD 1001 would provide clarity to all litigants that 
obtaining a right—to-sue letter is not a mere suggestion, but rather is mandatory if that litigant wants 
to seek attorney ’s fees, civil penal damages, and compensatory and punitive damages. 
The Maine Human Rights Act at Section 4622 states, “Attorney ’s fees under section 4614 and 
civil penal damages or compensatory and punitive damages under section 4613 may not be 
awarded to a plaintiff in a civil action under this Act unless the plaintiff alleges and establishes 
that, prior to the ﬁling of the civil action, the plaintiff ﬁrst ﬁled a complaint with the commission 
and the commission . . .” does a few speciﬁc things such as dismissing the case or issuing a right- 
to-sue letter. 
This seems clear. Plaintiffs cannot obtain those speciﬁed remedies unless they receive a right-to- 
sue letter before ﬁling a complaint in court. Right? It turns out that is now wrong. 
In Sl7*0udwaterAss0cs. v. Kirsch, 2:21-cv-00086-NT, at *26 (D. Me. Dec. 7, 2021), the company 
ﬁled suit against several former employees alleging that those employees violated employment 
contracts and stole clients. The employees ﬁled a counterclaim asserting various employment 
lillIer.com
Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matt Moonen 
March 21, 2023 
Page2 
discrimination claims before not only receiving a right-to-sue letter, but before even requesting a 
right-to-sue letter. The employer moved to dismiss those claims, because there was no doubt that 
the counterclaim plaintiffs had not received aright-to-sue letter. The Court, however, ruled that 
future prospective pleadings with “placeholder ” allegations are sufﬁcient because the counter- 
defendants knew the MHRA claims “Were coming down the pike.” 
At ﬁrst, I thought this ruling might be an anomaly. However, in June of 2022, a different judge in 
Ardifo v. Solvay, 1:21-cv-00142-JAW, at *3 6-37 (D. Me. June 14, 2022) relied on the Stroudwater 
case to excuse a plaintiffs admitted failure to receive a right-to-sue letter. And this was not a case 
where a plaintiff had requested a letter but was merely waiting to receive it. No, in Ardito, the 
plaintiff ﬁled a complaint and an amended complaint before even requesting a right~to-sue letter. 
In Ardito, the Plaintiff ﬁled his amended complaint only 30 days after ﬁling his complaint with 
the Human Rights Commission. Yet, the Court ruled that his failure to receive a right-to-sue letter 
was excusable, because he represented that he would request one once 180 days expired. 
This trend from the judiciary eviscerates the right-to-sue requirement and essentially renders the 
Commission process meaningless. Why would any plaintiff use the Commission anymore if they 
can ﬁle a complaint with the Commission on one day and then the very next day ﬁle a complaint 
in court with zero repercussions so long as they alleged that they will obtain a right-to-sue letter 
“down the pike”? Clearly, this was not the legislature ’s intent. Passing LD 1001 would resolve any 
doubt that a failure to receive a right-to-sue letter before ﬁling a complaint in court will limit the 
potential remedies available to a civil plaintiff. 
As to the change in Subsection 6 permitting the Commission to issue a right-to-sue letter asa 
matter of course after 180 days, this is intended to help both the Commission and the parties. It 
permits complainants to obtain relief faster and get to court if they so choose. Also, it helps the 
Commission lighten its case burden by moving matters off its plate that would otherwise sit 
dormant until a complainant got around to requesting a right-to-sue letter. It is way to speed up the 
ability for the parties to obtain relief. 
I am happy to answer any questions you may have now or in the future. 
Si erely, 
Jiaiw Steven J. Silver 
SIS/ss 
|ittler.com
