Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  1 
  
 
2021 WL 5 815910  
Only the Westlaw citation is currently available.  
United States District Court, D. Maine.  
STROUDWATER ASSOCIATES, Plaintiff,  
v. 
Robert KIRSCH, et al., Defendants.  
Docket No. 2:21 -cv-00086 -NT 
| 
Signed 12/07/2021  
Attorneys and Law Firms  
Shiloh D. Theberge , William J. Wahrer , Bernstein Shur, 
Portland, ME, for Plaintiff.  
John O’Shea Sullivan , Pro Hac Vice, Kevin R. Stone , Pro 
Hac Vice, Burr & Forman LLP, Atlanta, GA, Erica M. 
Johanson , Jensen Baird, Portland, ME, for Defendants.  
 
 
 
 
ORDER ON COUNTER -CLAIMANTS’ MOTION 
TO AMEND AND COUNTER -DEFENDANTS’ 
MOTION TO DISMISS  
Nancy Torresen , United States District Judge  
*1 Before me are two related motions: a motion by the 
Counter -Claimants to amend their counterclaims 
(“Counter -Claimants’ Mot. to Amend ”), and a motion 
by the Counter -Defendants to dismiss the counterclaims. 
For the reasons stated below, th e motion to amend is 
GRANTED , and the motion to dismiss is DENIED . 
  
 
BACKGROUND1 
1 
 The facts below are drawn from the allegations in the 
Counterclaims and the Amended Counterclaims, which 
I take as true for the purposes of deciding a motion to 
dismiss. Alston v. Spiegel , 988 F.3d 564, 571 (1st Cir. 
2021) . 
  
 
 
I. The Agreements  
Around April 2018, Plaintiff/Counter -Defendant 
Stroudwater Associates (“ Stroudwater ”) entered into a 
series of Purchase Money Loan Agreements (“ Loan 
Agreements ”) with five Stroudwater employees,2 
Defendants/Counter -Claimants John  Behn, Laurie Daigle, 
Douglas Johnson, Robert Kirsch, and C. Ryan Sprinkle 
(the “ Noteholders ”). Countercls. ¶¶ 11, 13, 18 (ECF Nos. 
12, 13, 14, 15, 16); Loan Agreements (ECF Nos. 12 -2, 
13-2, 14 -2, 15 -2, 16 -2).3 In exchange for an agreement to 
pay each of the Noteholders a particular sum of 
money —which was secured b y a Purchase Money Note 
(the “ Note ”)—the Noteholders agreed to lend 
Stroudwater money to buy up the Noteholders’ stock (the 
“deal”) in order to create an Employee Stock Ownership 
Plan (“ ESOP ”). Countercls. ¶¶ 11, 13 –14. These Notes 
were entered into simult aneously with the Loan 
Agreements. Loan Agreements § 3(c). And the Loan 
Agreements say that the Notes and Loan Agreements 
“have been made under substantially similar terms as” 
described in the Loan Agreements unless the Notes say 
otherwise. Loan Agreements  § 3(c).  
 2 
 Stroudwater Associates entered into Purchase M oney 
Loan Agreements with other employees, too, but those 
employees’ agreements are not germane to the 
disposition of these motions.  
 
 
3 
 Because the Counter -Claimants’ counterclaims and the 
attached exhibits are identical in most respects, for the 
sake of convenience, I refer to the counterclaims and  
exhibits collectively unless it is necessary to specify a 
particular Counter -Claimant’s counterclaim or attached 
exhibit. These counterclaim references only refer to the 
originally filed Counterclaims, not the Amended 
Counterclaims that two of the Counter -Claimants now 
seek to file.  
 
 
Stroudwater agreed to pay interest on the Notes, and the 
Loan Agreements specify that “[p]ayments of interest 
shall be made bi -annually”  on the first of January and on 
the first of July each year for a period of twenty years. 
Loan Agreements §§ 1, 2(a), (f). The Loan Agreements 
state that Stroudwater will be in default if it “fail[s] to 
make any payment of the principal of the ... Note wit hin 
twenty (20) days after” it becomes due. Loan Agreements 
§ 6. But there exists no such provision for the failure to 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  2 
 pay interest. Rather, if Stroudwater fails to pay any 
interest due on the Note within twenty days of its due 
date, that “unpaid interest shall be added to” the unpaid 
principal, causing the principal amount due under the 
Note to be adjusted. Loan Agreements § 6.  
  
*2 Three other provisions of the Loan Agreements are 
relevant here. One is a requirement that St roudwater 
permit the Noteholders to access and copy Stroudwater’s 
books and records upon the Noteholders’ requests. Loan 
Agreements § 5(g). The second is that Stroudwater “shall 
pay all Collection Costs promptly upon the [Noteholders’] 
demand from time to time.” Loan Agreements § 5(f). The 
Loan Agreements define “Collection Costs” as:  
any and all costs and expenses of enforcing [the Loan 
Agreement] including, without limitation, any and all 
costs and expenses of collecting [on] the [Note] and 
exercising the  [Noteholder’s] rights and remedies ... 
and any and all other expenses incurred by the 
[Noteholder] after the occurrence of any Default.... In 
all such events, such costs and expenses shall include, 
without limitation, the reasonable fees, expenses and 
disbursements of the [Noteholder’s] legal counsel.  
Loan Agreements § 1.  
  
And the third relevant provision of the Loan Agreements 
is that the Note and any accrued interest are secured by 
the assets of Stroudwater but are always subordinate to 
any security int erest “by a bank lender or other creditor 
of” Stroudwater. Loan Agreements § 2(h). This provision 
is consistent with the Junior Security Agreements 
(“JSAs ”) that the Noteholders entered into with 
Stroudwater a few months before the Loan Agreements. 
JSAs (E CF Nos. 12 -3, 13 -3, 14 -3, 15 -3, 16 -3). The JSAs 
state that the Noteholders’ security interests are “subject 
and subordinate to [a] Senior Security Agreement” and 
obligate the Noteholders “to confirm such subordination 
in writing at the request of [a] holde r of [a] Senior 
Security Interest.” JSAs § 2. In the JSAs, Stroudwater 
agreed to perform its obligations “in any agreement 
creating a Senior Security Interest or a Pari Passu Security 
Interest.” JSAs § 4(f). The JSAs define a “Pari Passu 
Security Interest”  as “the security interest granted by” 
Stroudwater to the Noteholders. JSAs § 1. The JSAs also 
prohibit Stroudwater from merging with another entity, at 
least under certain circumstances. JSAs § 6.  
  
In conjunction with the JSAs, the Noteholders also 
enter ed into Intercreditor Agreements. Intercreditor 
Agreements (ECF Nos. 12 -4, 13 -4, 14 -4, 15 -4, 16 -4). In 
signing the Intercreditor Agreements, the Noteholders 
agreed that their security interests were “of equal 
priority.” Intercreditor Agreements § 2 (emphas is 
deleted). As a result, in the event of distribution of Stroudwater’s assets, the Noteholders agreed that these 
assets would be distributed “in proportion to [the] 
amounts owing to the [Noteholders] on account of their 
outstanding Loans to” Stroudwater. Intercreditor 
Agreements § 3(a) (emphasis deleted).  
  
One final group of documents is relevant to the motions 
before me. That consists of the Subordination Agreements 
entered into by the Noteholders around the same time as 
the Loan Agreements. Subordinatio n Agreements 1 (ECF 
No. 23 -1). The parties to the Subordination Agreements 
are Stroudwater, Bangor Savings Bank (“ BSB ”), and the 
Noteholders. Subordination Agreements 1. According to 
the Subordination Agreements, the Noteholders (the 
“Junior Creditors”) ag reed: (1) to subordinate “all rights, 
claims and interests created pursuant to the Loan 
Documents” to money owed to BSB (the “Senior 
Creditor”); (2) that their claims “at all times remain[ed] 
fully unsecured”; (3) that they have a “right to receive 
regular ly scheduled payments of accrued interest (but not 
principal or any other amounts) on the remaining unpaid 
balance of the” Note; and (4) that the Noteholders would 
not “make demand for all or any portion of” the money 
owed to them or “commence any action o r proceeding 
against [Stroudwater] to recover all or any part of the” 
money owed to them, until Stroudwater paid the money it 
owed to BSB. Subordination Agreements §§ 1(c), 4, 5, 8.  
  
 
 
II. Stroudwater’s Alleged Breaches  
*3 The Noteholders allege that beginning in late 2018, 
Stroudwater began to struggle financially. Countercls. ¶¶ 
32–36. And they allege that Stroudwater’ s debts exceed 
its assets. Countercls. ¶¶ 47, 51. Among other debts, 
Stroudwater has a multi -million dollar outstanding loan to 
BSB and owes more than two million dollars to the 
Noteholders. Countercls. ¶ 49.  
  
As Stroudwater began to founder, Counter -Defe ndant 
Jeffrey Sommer, the managing director of Stroudwater 
and a member of the Stroudwater Board of Directors 
(“BOD ”), continued to receive a lucrative compensation 
package. Countercls. ¶¶ 3, 61. The Noteholders assume 
that this continues to be the case, a nd they allege that this 
is improper. Countercls. ¶ 62. The Noteholders allege that 
the members of the BOD, including Counter -Defendants 
Eric Shell and Opal Greenway, have a duty to review Mr. 
Sommer’s performance and compensation package and to 
make any n ecessary adjustments to it. Countercls. ¶¶ 4 –5, 
62. 
  
In 2019, Mr. Sommer took a personal bonus based on 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  3 
 anticipated revenue from a project, but the client then 
became insolvent, and Stroudwater was left with an 
unsecured claim exceeding $300,000. Counterc ls. ¶ 63. 
After Stroudwater was advised that it should expect no 
recovery on this claim, Mr. Sommer and Mr. Shell 
refused to remove this uncollectible receivable from 
Stroudwater’s books in an effort “to prop up” its financial 
statements and overstate Stro udwater’s value. Countercls. 
¶ 64. They did so in order to protect their incentive 
compensation. Countercls. ¶ 64.  
  
The Noteholders contend that, as a result of its financial 
difficulties, Stroudwater began to shirk its obligations 
under the Loan Agreemen ts and the other contracts 
outlined above. For example, Stroudwater did not make 
all of the interest payments that were due under the Loan 
Agreements on January 1, 2020, (the “ January 
Payments ”) including the payment owed to Mr. Kirsch. 
Countercls. ¶ 37. H owever, Ms. Greenway received her 
January Payment. Countercls. ¶ 37. Some individuals who 
did not receive their January Payments but remained 
employed by Stroudwater or sat on its BOD were 
reimbursed in some form, but others, like Mr. Kirsch, 
have not been . Countercls. ¶¶ 38 –39. Stroudwater also 
failed to make any of the next two interest payments due 
to the Noteholders under the Loan Agreements. 
Countercls. ¶ 42.  
  
The Noteholders further allege that Stroudwater 
overstated and misrepresented its financial performance in 
2020, which benefitted Mr. Sommer, Mr. Shell, and Ms. 
Greenway (the “ Individual Counter -Defendants ”). 
Countercls. ¶¶ 40 –41. And Stroudwater refused to allow 
the Noteholders to review its books and records to verify 
this allegation despite a demand by the Noteholders. 
Countercls. ¶¶ 43, 56, 58.  
  
The Noteholders allege a number of other improprieties 
by the Individual Counter -Defendants, including that: (1) 
as the sole ESOP trustees (and thus the sole shareholders 
of Stroudwater), they have us ed their positions to 
perpetually appoint themselves to the BOD; (2) they have 
acted in their own interests rather than those to whom 
they owe a fiduciary duty, such as by taking steps to 
remove high -performing employees to ensure that they 
and their favor ed employees get the highest bonuses; and 
(3) they have authorized and approved bonuses and raises 
in ways that benefit themselves and their supporters. 
Countercls. ¶¶ 15, 66, 68 –70. 
  
*4 The Noteholders also allege that Str oudwater violated 
the JSAs when, in November 2020, it merged with 
another entity. Countercls. ¶ 44.  
   
 
III. Behn and Daigle Allegations of Discrimination  
Ms. Daigle began work ing for Stroudwater in 2010. 
Daigle Proposed Am. Countercl. (“ Daigle PAC ”) ¶ 72 
(ECF No. 27 -5). In 2013, she was diagnosed with a 
chronic illness. Daigle PAC ¶ 74. Stroudwater then 
determined that Ms. Daigle’s illness made it too risky for 
her to travel, w hich was an essential function of her job. 
Daigle PAC ¶ 79. After Ms. Daigle underwent successful 
treatment and was cleared to return to work by her doctor, 
Stroudwater decided to restructure Ms. Daigle’s job to 
eliminate travel from her job duties. Daigle  PAC ¶¶ 
80–81. This impacted Ms. Daigle’s ability to perform her 
job, of which travel was a significant part. Daigle PAC ¶ 
87. Due to this, Ms. Daigle decided to resign her position 
in April 2013. Daigle PAC ¶ 98.  
  
In 2014, Mr. Behn became the President o f a new 
Stroudwater subsidiary. Daigle PAC ¶ 100. And in 
November 2014, Stroudwater re -hired Ms. Daigle to work 
for this new subsidiary. Daigle PAC ¶ 99. In these 
positions, Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle performed audits of 
the functionality of a pricing tool th at Stroudwater had 
developed for some of its clients. Behn Proposed Am. 
Countercl. (“ Behn  PAC ”) ¶¶ 74, 79 (ECF No. 27 -4); 
Daigle PAC ¶ 105. While in this new position, Ms. 
Daigle’s performance and employment continued to be 
evaluated through the lens of St roudwater’s unfounded 
concerns about her health. Daigle PAC ¶¶ 118 –19. 
  
Beginning in 2016, Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle repeatedly 
notified Stroudwater management that their audits had 
revealed problems that would create issues for 
Stroudwater’s clients and fo r Stroudwater’s ability to 
maintain compliance with the state and federal grants and 
funds used to build the pricing tool. Behn PAC ¶¶ 80 –82, 
84–85, 96 –97; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 111 –16. This compounded 
Stroudwater’s already -disparate treatment of Ms. Daigle. 
Daigl e PAC ¶ 130. Mr. Behn did not receive a response to 
at least some of the concerns that he raised. Behn PAC ¶¶ 
83, 86.  
  
Beginning in 2016, Mr. Behn’s stock award and pay 
raises began to decrease over prior years despite his 
increasing performance. Behn PAC  ¶ 98. When 
Stroudwater transitioned to the ESOP, he was not given 
shares of the ESOP that matched his level of contributions 
to the company, and his Note was undervalued by at least 
$800,000. Behn PAC ¶¶ 99 –102. Employees who were 
less tenured and lower p roducers received more shares 
than Mr. Behn did. Behn PAC ¶ 103. In the case of Ms. 
Daigle, she received lower raises, less recognition, and 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  4 
 fewer shares and stock options than other Stroudwater 
employees who were not performing as highly as she was. 
Daigl e PAC ¶ 117.  
  
On May 19, 2020, Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle notified 
Stroudwater that they were resigning, and all parties 
agreed that June 30, 2020, would be their final day of 
employment at Stroudwater. Behn PAC ¶ 109; Daigle 
PAC ¶  131. In this interim period, Mr. Behn and Ms. 
Daigle both had discussions with Stroudwater about an 
ongoing contract employment relationship to help 
transition Stroudwater clients after their departures. Behn 
PAC ¶ 110; Daigle PAC ¶ 140.  
  
*5 On June 26, 2020, Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle were 
notified that their employment was terminated for cause, 
effective June 29, 2020, because they had sent a proposal 
to a current Stroudwater client for the purpose of 
providing services with out Stroudwater’s consent and in 
an effort to compete with Stroudwater for such services, 
in violation of their employment agreements. Behn PAC ¶ 
112; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 132 –33. While Mr. Behn and Ms. 
Daigle did submit two such proposals, they were 
submitted on  behalf of Stroudwater pursuant to the 
transition discussions in which Mr. Behn, Ms. Daigle, and 
Stroudwater had previously engaged. Behn PAC ¶¶ 
117–19; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 135 –138. 
  
At the time of Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s separations 
from Stroudwater, they were each entitled to certain 
compensation for calendar years 2019 and 2020 that 
Stroudwater had not paid them. Behn PAC ¶¶ 122 –25, 
128; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 146 –49, 152.  
  
 
 
IV. The Counterclaims  
In March 2021, Stroudwater sued the Noteholders, for 
alleged breaches of their employment agreements, Compl. 
(ECF No. 1), the particulars of which are not relevant 
here. In conjunction with their Answers, the Noteholders 
brought various count erclaims against Stroudwater, Mr. 
Sommer, Mr. Shell, and Ms. Greenway (the 
“Counter -Defendants ”). Counterclaim Count I —asserted 
by each of the Noteholders —alleges that the 
Counter -Defendants have breached § 5(g) of the Loan 
Agreements by denying the Noteho lders access to 
Stroudwater’s books and records. Johnson Countercl. ¶¶ 
71–77; Kirsch Countercl. ¶¶ 71 –77; Sprinkle Countercl. 
¶¶ 71 –77; Behn Countercl. ¶¶ 87 –93; Daigle Countercl. 
¶¶ 86 –92. To remedy this alleged breach, the Noteholders 
are seeking a decre e of specific performance requiring 
Stroudwater to provide the requested books and records and an award of attorneys’ fees. Johnson Countercl. ¶¶ 
78–79; Kirsch Countercl. ¶¶ 78 –79; Sprinkle Countercl. 
¶¶ 78 –79; Behn Countercl. ¶¶ 94 –95; Daigle Countercl. 
¶¶ 93–94. 
  
Counterclaim Count II —also asserted by each of the 
Noteholders —alleges that the Counter -Defendants have 
breached their fiduciary duties, in particular their duty to 
Stroudwater’s creditors (which include the Noteholders). 
Johnson Countercl. ¶¶ 8 0–101; Kirsch Countercl. ¶¶ 
80–101; Sprinkle Countercl. ¶¶ 80 –101; Behn Countercl. 
¶¶ 96 –117; Daigle Countercl. ¶¶ 95 –116. Specifically, the 
Noteholders allege that the Counter -Defendants have 
breached their fiduciary duties in the following ways: (1) 
the BOD disparately treated Stroudwater creditors in 
violation of the various contracts signed as a part of the 
deal; (2) the BOD engaged in self -dealing by making 
interest payments to Ms. Greenway but not to all of other 
creditors who were owed interest payme nts (including 
Mr. Kirsch); (3) the BOD approved a merger in violation 
of the JSAs, and at a time when Stroudwater was unable 
to pay its debts; (4) the Counter -Defendants failed to 
allow the Noteholders access to Stroudwater’s books and 
records; (5) the Co mplaint is frivolous and was only filed 
by Stroudwater to try to gain leverage over the 
Noteholders; (6) Mr. Sommer and Mr. Shell overstated 
and misrepresented the financial position and value of 
Stroudwater, and received inflated compensation as a 
result,  to the detriment of the ESOP participants and 
Stroudwater’s creditors; and (7) the Individual 
Counter -Defendants have forced out some Stroudwater 
employees (and favored others) in order to elevate their 
own standing at the expense of the ESOP participants  and 
Stroudwater’s creditors. Johnson Countercl. ¶¶ 88 –100; 
Kirsch Countercl. ¶¶ 88 –100; Sprinkle Countercl. ¶¶ 
88–100; Behn Countercl. ¶¶ 104 –16; Daigle Countercl. ¶¶ 
103–15. 
  
Mr. Kirsch’s counterclaim has another breach of contract 
claim (“ Kirsch Count III”) that he brings against all of 
the Counter -Defendants. Kirsch Countercl. ¶¶ 102 –08. 
Specifically, Mr. Kirsch alleges that Stroudwater’s failure 
to make his January Payment, while making the January 
Payment to others, violated Stroudwater’s contractual  
obligations to treat all of its noteholders equally. Kirsch 
Countercl. ¶¶ 103 –07. Although he brings only a breach 
of contract claim, Mr. Kirsch asserts that this disparate 
payout of the January Payments also constitutes 
conversion. Kirsch Countercl. ¶ 10 5. 
  
*6 Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle bring four additional 
counterclaims.4 Counterclaim Count III (“ Behn/Daigle 
Count III ”) is a breach of contract claim against 
Stroudwater, alleging that Stroudwater breached Mr. 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  5 
 Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’ s employment agreements by 
failing to pay all of their compensation and also because 
of how their notice of termination occurred. Behn PAC ¶¶ 
160–63; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 184 –87. Counterclaim Count IV 
is a quantum meruit claim against Stroudwater alleging 
that St roudwater failed to pay Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle 
for their services. Behn PAC ¶¶ 166 –69; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 
190–93. Counterclaim Count V is an unjust enrichment 
claim against Stroudwater alleging that Stroudwater 
received the benefit of Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle ’s 
services without paying for their value. Behn PAC ¶¶ 
172–74; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 196 –98. Counterclaim Count VI 
is an employment discrimination claim against 
Stroudwater alleging that Stroudwater mistreated, 
under -rewarded, and terminated Mr. Behn and Ms. Daig le 
because of the respective concerns they raised about the 
pricing tool and, in Ms. Daigle’s case, because of her 
medical condition. Behn PAC ¶¶ 181 –82; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 
205–07. 
 4 
 Because, as described below, I ultimately allow Mr. 
Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s requested amendments, for 
purposes of convenience, I rely on  the allegations in 
their proposed amended counterclaims.  
 
 
 
DISCUSSION  
 
I. Motion to Amend  
 
A. Procedural History  
As a part of their original Counterclaims, which they filed 
on June 7, 2021, Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle mentioned that 
they had filed complaints of discrimination in 
employment against Stroudwater with the Maine Human 
Rights Commission (“ MHRC ”), that they wou ld soon be 
eligible to request “right to sue” letters from the MHRC, 
and that they intended to request those letters. Behn 
Countercl. ¶¶ 71 –72; Daigle Countercl. ¶¶ 71 –72. Each 
also stated that he/she would “seek to bring [his/her] 
claims against Stroudwat er by adding an additional 
counterclaim for discrimination in employment in this 
action following receipt of a right to sue letter.” Behn 
Countercl. ¶ 73; Daigle Countercl. ¶ 73.  
  
In the interim, each brought a “placeholder” count of 
sorts. Both Countercl aims contain a “Count VI” described 
as a claim for “Discrimination in Employment.” Behn Countercl., at 51; Daigle Countercl., at 51. But both 
Counterclaims explicitly acknowledged that Mr. Behn 
and Ms. Daigle were “not entitled to assert [their] claims” 
at the time the Counterclaims were filed and declared that 
they were “notif[ying] the Court and Stroudwater” of their 
intent to amend their Counterclaims upon the receipt of 
their right to sue letters. Behn Countercl. ¶ 135; Daigle 
Countercl. ¶ 134.  
  
On Oct ober 12, 2021, Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle received 
their right to sue letters from the MHRC. 
Counter -Claimants’ Mot. to Amend 3 (ECF No. 27). And, 
true to their earlier stated intentions, on October 14, 2021, 
both Counter -Claimants filed motions to amend “to add 
claims for employment discrimination.” 
Counter -Claimants’ Mot. to Amend 3. The Amended 
Counterclaims introduce new and specific facts pertaining 
to Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s allegations of 
employment discrimination, and they replace the earlier 
place holder counts (what used to be labeled “Count VI”) 
with specific allegations of employment discrimination 
(still labeled “Count VI”). Behn PAC ¶¶ 71 –121, 176 –85; 
Daigle PAC ¶¶ 71 –145, 200 –07. 
  
The Counter -Defendants argue that the motion should be 
denied on the ground of futility. Opp’n to Counterclaim 
Pls. John Behn and Laurie Daigle’s Mot. to Suppl. or 
Amend Countercls. (“ Counter -Defs.’ Opp’n to Mot. to 
Amend ”) 2 –3 (ECF No. 28). The employment  
discrimination claims are futile, the Counter -Defendants 
say, because Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle filed their 
employment discrimination claims as a part of their 
original Counterclaims (despite their protestations to the 
contrary), and they did so without ful ly exhausting their 
administrative remedies. Counter -Defs.’ Opp’n to Mot. to 
Amend 3. The Counter -Defendants then argue that Mr. 
Behn and Ms. Daigle cannot receive the only remedies 
they are seeking (due to this alleged failure to exhaust), 
and so the prop osed amendments would be futile and 
should be denied. Counter -Defs.’ Opp’n to Mot. to 
Amend 3 –4 & n.2.  
  
 
 
B. Legal Standard  
*7 “The court may p ermit a party to file a supplemental 
pleading asserting a counterclaim that matured or was 
acquired by the party after serving an earlier pleading.” 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 13(e) . In addition, Rule 15(a) of the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure allows for amendment to 
a pleading with leave of court and directs the court to 
“freely give leave when justice so requires.” Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 15(a)(2) . Leave to amend may be denied for a 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  6 
 multitude of reasons, including on the ground of futility. 
Kader v. Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc. , 887 F.3d 48, 60 (1st 
Cir. 2018) . An amendment is futile if the amended 
claim(s) “would fail to state a claim upon which relief 
could be granted.” Rife v. One W. Bank, F.S.B. , 873 F.3d 
17, 21 (1st Cir. 2017)  (quoting Glassman v. 
Computervision Corp. , 90 F.3d 617, 623 (1st Cir. 1996) ). 
  
 
 
C. Analysis  
Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle treat Rule 13(e)  and Rule 15(a)  
as alternative bases for why their proposed amendments 
should be allowed. Counter -Claimants’ Mo t. to Amend 5. 
The Counter -Defendants not only do not dispute that 
these alternative bases exist, but they ignore the 
application of Rule 13(e)  entirely. Instead, they only 
argue that leave  to amend should be denied on the ground 
of futility.  
  
I agree with Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle that Rule 13(e)  
permits their amendment because, at the time they filed 
their Counterclaims, th ey did not have right to sue letters 
and thus were not permitted to bring their employment 
discrimination claims. The Counter -Defendants do not 
offer any argument or authority to support the idea that 
Rule 13(e)  has a futility exception. Having failed to 
address the Rule 13(e)  issue, the Counter -Defendants 
have waived any objection to it. See United States v. 
Zannino , 895 F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990) .5 The Motion to 
Amend is GRANTED . 
 5 
 The Counter -Defendants make an identical version of 
their futility argument in their motion to dismiss as a 
basis for why they say C ount VI should be dismissed 
from Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s Counterclaims. 
Mem. of Law in Supp. of Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to 
Dismiss 15 –18 (ECF No. 23). While the analysis with 
respect to both motions is more or less the same, 
because of the differing standa rds of review, I address 
the motion to dismiss argument below. And, for the 
same reasons why I ultimately find that Count VI 
should not be dismissed, even if I were to address the 
Counter -Defendants’ futility argument, my analysis 
would dictate the finding  that amendment is not futile 
and should be permitted.  
 
 
At oral arg ument, I noted that the proposed amended 
counterclaims do not appear to allege that Mr. Behn and 
Ms. Daigle have filed a claim with the MHRC and 
received right -to-sue letters. That appears to be a 
technical requirement required by the Maine Human 
Rights Ac t (“MHRA ”). See 5 M.R.S. § 4622(1) . As a result, I am extending to Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle 
additional leave to amend to correct that omission in their 
Amended Counterclaims should they  choose to do so.  
  
 
 
II. Motion to Dismiss  
 
A. Legal Standard  
When evaluating a motion to dismiss, I take “as true all 
well-pleaded facts alleged in the complaint and draw all  
reasonable inferences therefrom in the pleader’s favor.” 
Alston v. Spiegel , 988 F.3d 564, 571 (1st Cir. 2 021) 
(quoting Santiago v. Puerto Rico , 655 F.3d 61, 72 (1st 
Cir. 2011) ). “[A] complaint will survive a motio n to 
dismiss when it alleges ‘enough facts to state a claim to 
relief that is plausible on its face.’ ” Id. (quoting Bell Atl. 
Corp. v. Twombly , 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007) ). A claim is 
“plausible” if the facts alleged give rise to a reasonable 
inference of liability. Id. “Plausible” means “more than 
merely possible.” Germanowski v. Harris , 854 F.3d 68, 
71 (1st Cir. 2017)  (quoting Schatz v. Republican State 
Leadership Comm. , 669 F.3d 50, 55 (1st Cir. 2012) ). In 
evaluating the  plausibility of a claim, it is helpful to 
examine the claim against the background of the elements 
of a prima facie case for liability. Id. at 72 . But “[i]t is not 
necessary to plead facts sufficient to establish a prima 
facie case at the pleading stage.” Id. (quoting 
Rodríguez -Reyes v. Molina -Rodríguez , 711 F.3d 49, 54 
(1st Cir. 2013) ). 
  
*8 On a motion to dismiss, courts “usually consider only 
the complaint, documents attached to it, and d ocuments 
expressly incorporated into it.” Foley v. Wells Fargo 
Bank, N.A. , 772 F.3d 63, 72 (1st Cir. 2014) . But in some 
circumstances, a court may consider additional evidence, 
including documents where the authenticity is not 
disputed, “documents central to” the plaintiff’s claim, or 
“documents sufficiently referred to in the complaint.” Id. 
at 74  (quoting Watterson v. Page , 987 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 
1993) ). “When the complaint relies upon a document, 
whose authenticity is not challenged, such a document 
‘merges into the pleadings’ and the court may properly 
consider it under a Rule  12(b)(6) motion to dismiss.” Alt. 
Energy, Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. , 267 F.3d 
30, 33 (1st Cir. 200 1) (quoting Beddall v. State St. Bank 
& Tr. Co. , 137 F.3d 12, 17 (1st Cir. 1998) ). 
  
 
 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  7 
 B. Analysis  
1. Count I – Breach of Contract Due to Refusal to 
Provide Access to Books and Records  
The Counter -Defendants initially moved to dismiss Count 
I on the ground that the Counter -Claimants are not 
entitled to the relief sought (specific performance and 
attorneys’ fees). Mem. of Law in Supp. of Counter -Defs.’ 
Mot. to Dismiss (“ Counter -Defs.’ Mot . to Dismiss ”) 5–7 
(ECF No. 23). In addition, in reply, the 
Counter -Defendants contend that Count I is now moot 
because they say that they notified the Noteholders the 
day before filing their reply that they would make the 
2019 books and records available to the Noteholders 
within five business days and that they would make the 
2020 records available when completed, by the end of 
September 2021. Reply in Supp. of Countercl. Defs.’ 
Mot. to Dismiss Countercls. (“ Counter -Defs.’ Reply ”) 7 
(ECF No. 25). At oral argument, counsel for the 
Counter -Defendants claimed that Stroudwater had now 
provided the financial records for both 2019 and 2020, but 
the Counter -Claimants’ counsel represented that the 
Noteholders had only received high -level financial 
summaries and th at they had not been given the “access to 
all of the Company’s books and records” required by the 
Loan Agreements. Based on the representations at oral 
argument, this claim is clearly not moot as the 
Counter -Defendants contend it is.6 
 6 
 Even if Stroudwater had provided full access to its 
books, a “defendant cannot automatically moot a case 
simply by ending its unlawful c onduct once sued. 
Otherwise, a defendant could engage in unlawful 
conduct, stop when sued to have the case declared 
moot, then pick up where he left off, repeating this 
cycle until he achieves all his unlawful ends.” Already, 
LLC v. Nike, Inc. , 568 U.S. 85, 91 (2013)  (citation 
omitted). As a result, “ a defendant claiming that its 
voluntary compliance moots a case bears the 
formidable burden of showing that it is absolutely clear 
the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably 
be expected to recur.” Id. (quoting Friends of the Earth, 
Inc. v. Laidlaw Env’t Servs. (TOC), Inc. , 528 U.S. 167, 
190 (2000) ). The Counter -Defendants have failed to 
meet that bur den here.  
 
 
The Counter -Defendants also argue that the Noteholders 
are not entitled to specific performance because they can 
pursue a claim for monetary damages. But the 
Counter -Defendants fail to identify a way in which 
damages could offset the harm of t he failure to disclose 
the company books and records. Other courts to have 
considered the issue have found specific performance to 
be appropriate in similar situations. See, e.g.,  JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. v. Winget , 510 F.3d 577, 579 –80, 585 
(6th Cir. 2007)  (finding that there existed no “adequate 
remedy at law to enforce” parties’  credit agreement 
allowing for inspection of financial records); Microsoft 
Corp. v. Weidmann Elec. Tech. Inc. , Cas e No. 
5:15-cv-153, 2016 WL 7165949, at *10 (D. Vt. Dec. 7, 
2016)  (“[S]pecific performance is available because there 
is no adequate remedy at law for Weidmann’s breach of 
its verification obligation.”).  
  
*9 Finally, the Counter -Defendants’ argument that the 
Noteholders are not entitled to attorneys’ fees because 
there is no statute or written agreement entitling them to 
fees is undercut by § 5(f) of the Loan Agreements. This 
section entitles the Noteholders to “Collection  Costs,” 
which are defined to include “any and all costs and 
expenses of enforcing” the Loan Agreements, including 
“the reasonable fees, expenses and disbursement of [their] 
legal counsel.” Taking all reasonable inferences in the 
Noteholders’ favor, I must  construe this to mean that they 
are entitled to attorneys’ fees because they are suing to 
enforce the Loan Agreements.  
  
The motion to dismiss Count I is DENIED . 
  
 
2. Count I I – Breach of Trust and Fiduciary Duties  
The Counter -Defendants levy three attacks against Count 
II. They argue that the Subordination Agreements bar 
Count II, that the Counter -Defendants breached no duties 
under the Loan Agree ments, and that the Individual 
Counter -Defendants owed no duty to the Noteholders. 
Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 7 –11. I address each in 
turn. 
  
Pursuant to the Subordination Agreements,7 the 
Noteholders agreed not to sue Stroudwater “to recover all 
or any part of the” money owed to them until Stroudwater 
paid the  money it owed to BSB. The Counter -Claimants 
assert that they are suing for damages caused by the 
Counter -Defendants’ alleged breaches of fiduciary duties 
owed to Stroudwater’s creditors; they are not suing to 
recover the money owed to them. Mem. in Opp’n to Mot. 
to Dismiss Countercls. (“ Counter -Claimants’ Opp’n ”) 
13 (ECF No. 24). The Counter -Defendants dispute this by 
tallying up the number of times Count II uses the term 
“interest payments,” and they say that if the 
Counter -Claimants are not suing to reco ver the money 
owed to them through Count II, then “it is unclear” what 
they are seeking. Counter -Defs.’ Reply 4.  
 7 The parties dispute whether I can properly consider the 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  8 
  Subordination Agreements at this stage of the litigation. 
The Counter -Claimants insist that I cannot because they 
“are not attached to the pleadings or referred to 
therein.” Mem. in Opp’n to Mot. to Dismiss Countercls. 
11 n.3 (ECF No. 24). But in addition to documents 
sufficiently referred to in a complaint, I can also 
consider documents where authenticity is not disputed. 
The Counter -Claimants do not challenge the 
authenticity of the Subordination Agreements. The 
Loan Agreements and Junior Security Agreements 
(“JSAs ”)—all of which were attached to the 
Counterclaims —mention the subordination of the 
Noteholders’ interests. And t he JSAs specifically 
obligate the Noteholders to confirm this subordination 
in writing. This appears to be a specific reference to the 
Subordination Agreements.  
At oral argument, counsel for the Counter -Claimants 
asserted that based on the limited financia l information 
that he has received from Stroudwater, it appears that 
the Bangor Savings Bank (“ BSB ”) loan has been paid 
off. If that were the case, then the Subordination 
Agreements should no longer be in effect. But at the 
motion to dismiss stage, I am li mited to what is 
contained in the pleadings, documents that are 
sufficiently referred to in the pleadings, and documents 
where authenticity is not disputed. The 
Counter -Claimants themselves assert that Stroudwater 
still owes BSB over $2,000,000. Countercls . ¶ 49 (ECF 
Nos. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16). Indeed, the allegation that 
Stroudwater owes this money to BSB is part of the 
basis for the Counter -Claimants’ allegation that 
Stroudwater is insolvent. Accordingly, I consider the 
Subordination Agreements in my analys is. 
 
 
The Counter -Defendants misunderstand the purpose of 
Count II. Count II does not allege that the 
Counter -Defendants are obligated to pay any of the 
money owed to the Noteholders under the Loan 
Agreements. Rather, it alleges that the 
Counter -Defendant s have breached their fiduciary duties 
to the Noteholders. What the Counter -Defendants are 
seeking in terms of a remedy is damages for these alleged 
breaches, not repayment of their loans. Johnson 
Countercl. ¶ 101 (“Sommer, Shell, and Greenway are 
liable f or their multiple breaches of fiduciary duties and 
other duties owed....”); Kirsch Countercl. ¶ 101 (same); 
Sprinkle Countercl. ¶ 101 (same); Behn PAC ¶ 159 
(same); Daigle PAC ¶ 183 (same).  
  
*10 The Counter -Defendants nex t contend that they 
breached no duties under the Loan Agreements, arguing 
that Stroudwater was entitled under the Loan Agreements 
to defer interest payments. Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to 
Dismiss 8 –9. Even if I assume that this assertion is true, 
this argument st ill fails due to the depth of Count II. 
Count II alleges multiple breaches of fiduciary duties beyond the alleged failure to pay interest payments, 
including that Mr. Sommer and Mr. Shell overstated and 
misrepresented the financial position and value of 
Stroudwater and that the Individual Counter -Defendants 
forced out some Stroudwater employees (and favored 
others) in order to elevate their own standing at the 
expense of the ESOP participants and Stroudwater’s 
creditors.  
  
Finally, the Individual Counter -Defendants argue that 
they owed no duty to the Noteholders because, under 
Maine law, corporate directors only owe a duty to the 
corporation (i.e., the shareholders), not to creditors. 
Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 9 –11. But in support of 
this assertion the Counter -Defendants cite to cases that do 
not involve creditors, cases involving solvent 
corporations,8 and cases involving Delaware law. 
Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 9 –10 (citing various 
cases). These cases do not offer answers to the relevant 
question of whether the directors of an insolvent 
corporation (such as  Stroudwater, according to the 
Counter -Claimants’ allegations) owe a duty to the 
corporation’s creditors under Maine law. The 
Counter -Defendants also point to the Maine Business 
Corporation Act, which they say does not provide a cause 
of action for credito rs against directors. Counter -Defs.’ 
Reply 2 (citing 13-C M.R.S. § 832 ). But that statute is not 
helpful to this inquiry, because it does not lay out when a 
corporate director is liable, but only when a corporate 
director is not. See  13-C M.R.S. § 832(1) . 
 8 
 The Counter -Defendants lean heavily on Tiernan v. 
Barresi , which held that “under Maine law ... a party 
who is not  a shareholder has no standing to litigate a 
breach of fiduciary duty claim against corporate 
directors,” including creditors. 944 F. Supp. 35, 37 (D. 
Me. 1996) . But it does not appear that Tiernan  involved 
an insolvent corporation, and, in evaluating corporate 
duties under Maine law, the court analyzed a 
now-repealed statute, which “ expressly create[d] a duty 
on the part of the directors and officers of a corporation 
to act in good faith toward the corporation and the 
shareholders” whereas no such statute created a duty 
vis-à-vis creditors. See id.  
 
 
I agree that “[a]t least while a corporation remains 
solvent, Maine law has not recognized any directors’ duty 
to creditors.” Dev. Specialists, Inc . v. Kaplan , 574 B.R. 1, 
13 (D. Me.) , aff’d sub nom.  Irving Tanning Co. v. Kaplan , 
876 F.3d 384 (1st Cir. 2017) . But “ [a]s a matter of 
common law ... when a corporation becomes insolvent ... 
the corporate directors and officers are viewed as trustees 
of the corporate assets, and they then become engaged in 
a fiduciary relationship with the corporation’s creditors.” 
Paper, Allied -Indus., Chem. & Energy Workers Int’l 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  9 
 Union v. Sherman Lumber Co. , No. CV -00-41, 2001 WL 
1719233, at *6 (Me. S uper. Ct. June 28, 2001)  (citing 
Mitsubishi Caterpillar Forklift Am., Inc. v. Superior Serv. 
Assocs., Inc., 81 F. Supp. 2d 101, 115 –16 (D. Me. 1999)  
and Symonds v. Lewis , 48 A. 121, 123 (Me. 1901) ); see 
Fletcher Cyclopedia of the Law of Corporations § 
1035.60 (2021)  (“In most jurisdictions, when a 
corporation becomes insolvent, officers and directors of a 
corporation owe a fiduciary duty to the corporation’s 
creditors.”).  
  
This does not necessarily settle the issue. The 
Counter -Defendants put forward legitimate arguments as 
to why I should not follow Mitsubishi  or Symonds.  But at 
the end of the day, neither the Individual 
Counter -Defendants nor the Counter -Claimants has 
identified a case arising under Maine law that fully 
analyzes this fiduciary duty issue in the context of a 
creditor suing a director of an insolvent corporation. It is 
the Counter -Defendants’  burden to establish that the 
Counter -Claimants have no plausible claim for a breach 
of fiduciary duty, and they have not met this burden. The 
motion to dismiss Count II is DENIED . 
  
 
3. Kirsch Count III – Breach of Contract Due to 
Failure to Make January Payment to Kirsch  
*11 Mr. Kirsch alleges in Kirsch Count III that the 
Counter -Defendants’ failure to make Mr. Kirsch’s 
January Payment breache d the Loan Agreements’ 
requirement that interest payments must be made 
biannually (§ 2(f)) and breached the JSAs’ and 
Intercreditor Agreements’ requirements “to treat all 
noteholders with equal priority” (§ 1 and § 3(a), 
respectively). Counter -Claimants’ O pp’n 2, 15 –17. At 
oral argument, counsel for the Counter -Claimants 
clarified that it considers payments of interest to some 
Noteholders but not to Mr. Kirsch to be a violation of the 
Intercreditor Agreements’ provision on the use of 
collateral. See Intercr editor Agreements § 3(a). According 
to Counter -Claimant Kirsch, because Stroudwater’s cash 
is an asset that should be considered collateral, 
Stroudwater was required to make the interest payments 
“in proportion to amounts owing to the [Noteholders] on 
account of their outstanding Loans.” Intercreditor 
Agreements § 3(a) (emphasis deleted). This issue may 
ultimately depend on whether the Subordination 
Agreement is in effect. See supra  note 7. While it is not 
clear to me that there is any duty under the Agreem ents to 
pay interest, it is plausible that any interest payments that 
are made must be made to each of the Noteholders. At 
this stage of the proceedings, I credit Counter -Claimant Kirsch’s theory, and I DENY  the Motion to Dismiss 
Count III.  
  
 
4. Behn/Daigle Counts III (Breach of Contract Due to 
Breach of Behn and Daigle Employment Agreements) 
and IV (Quantum Meruit)  
Proving a breach of contract claim requires proof of a 
breach of a material contract term, causation, and 
damages. Me. Energy Recovery Co. v. United Steel 
Structures, Inc. , 1999 ME 31, ¶ 7, 724 A.2d 1248, 1250 . 
The Counter -Defendants argue that Behn/Daigle Count III 
fails to establish any of those elements because Mr. 
Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s allegations of a breach of their 
employment agreements is too nonspecific. 
Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 12 –14. In particular, the 
Counter -Defendants complain that Mr. Behn and Ms. 
Daigle never identify which provision(s) of their 
employment agreements was/were breached . 
Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 12 –13. 
  
Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle have both alleged that they had 
employment agreements with Stroudwater and that 
Stroudwater breached material terms of these contracts by 
failing to pay them all of the compensation that the y are 
due. Behn PAC ¶¶ 122 –28, 161 –62; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 
146–52, 185 –87. This is sufficient to support their claims. 
Contrary to the Counter -Defendants’ assertion, Mr. Behn 
and Ms. Daigle allege that their employment agreements 
required compensation for 2019 a nd 2020 that they were 
not paid. And the Counter -Defendants identify no 
authority for the idea that Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle must 
identify anything more specific in their pleadings, such as 
the specific provisions of their employment agreements at 
issue.  
  
Similarly, the Counter -Defendants’ assertions that Mr. 
Behn and Ms. Daigle have insufficiently alleged damages 
is contradicted by the Amended Counterclaims (and, for 
that matter, the Counterclaims). Both Mr. Behn and Ms. 
Daigle allege that the Counter -Defe ndants failed to pay 
them particular forms of compensation that they were 
due, such as their base salaries for June 30, 2020; their 
401(k) employer contribution; and unpaid incentive 
bonuses and commissions for revenue generated in 2019 
and 2020.  
  
For the  same reason, in the context of the quantum meruit 
claim (Count IV), although the Counter -Defendants 
contend that Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle have not specified 
which services were rendered and why they were entitled 
to payment, the Amended Counterclaims belie  this claim. 
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  10 
 Behn PAC ¶¶ 122 –28; Daigle PAC ¶¶ 146 –52. The 
motions to dismiss Behn/Daigle Counts III and IV are 
DENIED . 
  
 
5. Count V – Unjust Enrichment  
The Counter -Defendants  move to dismiss Mr. Behn and 
Ms. Daigle’s unjust enrichment claim on the ground that 
the existence of their employment agreements (which the 
Counter -Defendants acknowledge) precludes such a 
claim. Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 15. Nevertheless, 
the Feder al Rules of Civil Procedure specifically allow a 
party to plead alternative, and even inconsistent, claims 
for liability. Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(d)(2)  (“A party may set out 
2 or more statements of a claim or defense 
alternatively....”), (d)(3) (“A party may state as many 
separate claims or defenses as it has, regardless of 
consistency.”); cf. GMAC Com. Mortg. Corp. v. 
Gleichman , 84 F. Supp. 2d 127, 136 –37 (D. Me. 1999)  
(“While the Maine Law Court has recognized ‘that the 
existence of a contract precludes r ecovery on a theory of 
unjust enrichment’ ... a party, nonetheless, is not 
precluded from pleading both theories because a 
factfinder may find that no contract exists and may still 
award damages on a theory of unjust enrichment.’ ”) 
(quoting June Roberts Agency, Inc. v. Venture Props., 
Inc., 676 A.2d 46, 49 n.1 (Me. 1996) ). The motion to 
dismiss Count VI is DENIED . 
  
 
6. Count VI – Employment Discrimination9 
9 
 I recognize that the Counter -Defendants’ motion to 
dismiss pertained to Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s 
original Count VI and that that count will now be 
supplanted by the amended versions of Count VI. I also 
recognize that the Amended Counterclaims have not 
yet been filed. For the sake of efficiency, I treat the 
Counter -Defendants’ motion to dismiss, in combination 
with their opposition to the motion to amend, as a 
motion to dismiss the new versions of Count VI for the 
same reasons as in that motion and that opposition. 
However, now that I have allowed the requested 
amendments, once the Amended Counterclaims are 
filed, the Counter -Defendants may still file a motion as 
to the merits of the new versions of Count VI (should 
they wish to do so) to the extent permitted by the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  
 
 
*12 The MHRA limits a plaintiff’s remedies if, “ prior to the filing of the civil action,” the plaintiff fails to file a 
complaint with the MHRC and the MHRC fails to act in a 
particular manner, such as by issuing a right -to-sue letter. 
5 M.R.S. § 4622(1) . The Counter -Defendants allege that 
Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s remedies are so limited 
because when they filed their Counterclaims (which was 
before they received their right -to-sue letters), they 
“fil[ed]” their “civil action.”  The Counter -Defendants put 
forth this argument despite Mr. Behn’s and Ms. Daigle’s 
explicit statements in their Counterclaims that they were 
not yet bringing their employment discrimination claims. 
Behn Countercls. ¶ 72 (noting future “eligib[ility] to 
request a ‘right to sue’ letter”); ¶ 73 (“Behn will seek to 
bring his claims ... following receipt of a right to sue 
letter.”); ¶ 135 (“Because Behn is not entitled to assert his 
claims currently pending before the [MHRC] until his 
receipt of a right to sue letter, Behn hereby notifies the 
Court and Stroudwater that he intends to amend these 
Counterclaims upon his receipt of the right to sue letter 
from the [MHRC].”); Daigle Countercls. ¶¶ 72 –73, 134.  
  
The Counter -Defendants offer no authority to support 
their formalistic contention that the filing of “placeholder 
counts” is sufficient to trigger the bar on the particular 
remedies outlined in § 4622 . I credit Mr. Behn and Ms. 
Daigle’s ass ertions that they were not yet bringing their 
employment discrimination claims but were merely 
putting Stroudwater and the Court on notice that those 
claims were coming down the pike. I thus conclude that 
Mr. Behn and Ms. Daigle did not “rush[ ] to assert Count 
VI before complying with the provisions of § 4622 ,” 
Counter -Defs.’ Mot. to Dismiss 18, as the 
Counter -Defendants contend. The Counter -Defendants’ 
contention is particularly ironic  since Mr. Behn and Ms. 
Daigle were first hauled into Court by Stroudwater; they 
did not race to assert their claims without regard to the 
MHRA. The motion to dismiss Count VI is DENIED . 
  
 
CONCLUSION  
For the reasons stated above, the Court GRANTS  the 
motion to amend (ECF No. 27) and sua sponte  GRANTS  
the Counter -Claimants further leave to amend their 
Amended Counterclaims as stated above, within seven 
days. The Court DENIES  the motion to dismiss (ECF No. 
22). 
  
SO ORDERED.  
All Citations  
Stroudwater Associates v. Kirsch, Slip Copy (2021)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  11 
 Slip Copy, 2021 WL 5815910   
End of Document  
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  
 
 
 
 
