David Gibson
Morrill
LD 142
My name is David Gibson. I am the Director of Energy at College of the Atlantic, 
where I am leading efforts to transition our campus off of fossil fuels by 2030. I 
highly encourage you to support LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate-related Service 
Work.
I have extensive experience with AmeriCorps programs. This includes serving as an 
AmeriCorps Volunteer In Service To America (VISTA) for 1.5 years (2009-2011) 
with the non-profit Envirolution in Reno, Nevada; 3 years overseeing other 
AmeriCorps Volunteers (2011-2014) for Envirolution; and creating a new AmeriCops
program, the Nevada Clean Energy Corps (2015/2016), while I worked for the 
Nevada Governor’s Office of Energy. I hope that my past service and experience 
provides benefit and useful insights for this committee.
In 2009, after three years of working in construction management in Connecticut and 
New Jersey, I resigned from my job in order to serve as an AmeriCorps VISTA with 
Envirolution in Reno. Envirolution was a small start-up non-profit that had been 
created by some colleagues I knew from Connecticut. While serving as an 
AmeriCorps member, I developed hands-on lessons and curriculum to teach middle 
school and high school students about energy efficiency and clean energy. We 
developed partnerships with local schools where I worked directly in the classroom, 
leading students on energy assessments of their school buildings. I created homework 
assignments that had the students identifying how their homes use energy and ways to
reduce energy use and costs for their families. 
Over 5 years, I transitioned from an AmeriCorps member to staff at Envirolution, and 
managed other AmeriCorps members as they helped expand the programmatic 
offerings and reach. We led professional development workshops for teachers in Reno
and Las Vegas, training hundreds of teachers how to use the lessons, materials and 
curriculum that we developed to teach their students. We helped the students to 
identify energy-saving measures for their schools, and student teams develop 
cost-saving proposals for their school administrators. Today, Envirolution is actively 
working with 250+ teachers at 115 schools, and has reached more than 85,000 
students.  This is the impact that AmeriCorps programs can have for the local 
community. (https://envirolution.org/programs/education/project-recharge/)
This funding will help to implement climate solutions in Maine, offer on the job 
training for members, and for people like me: it offers the opportunity to explore a 
new career path that is beneficial for the state and the planet. I wouldn't be in the role 
I have today without AmeriCorps programs like this one.
Thank you Representative Rielly for bringing this forward. 
