Testimony of Ivan J. Fernandez, University of Maine Climate Change Institute, 
before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affair s of the 1 31st Maine 
Legislature, in support of LD 142, “An Act to Fund Climate -related Service Work ” 
 
 
1 
 Senator Rafferty , Representative Brenn an, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs : my name is Ivan Fernandez  and I 
support LD 142 . I have been Professor at the University of Maine for four decades, 
with my research focusing on the biogeochemical responses of ecosystems to a 
changing chemical and physical climate. For the past 20 years I have served on 
various advisory panels for the U .S. Environmental Protection Agency and its 
Science Advisory Board. I have been particularly committed to  provid ing the best 
available science in support  of state policy, and most  recently have had the privilege 
of serving on the Maine Climate Council and  co-Chair ing the Council’s Scientific and 
Technical Subcommittee . I also serve on the Maine Climate Corps Task Force.  
The escalating evidence of a changing climate and its accumulating effects on 
Maine are clear as chronicled in the University’s Maine Climate Future  reports, the 
Council’s 2020 Scientific  and Technical Subcommittee 370 page report “ Scientific 
Assessment of Climate C hange and Its Effects in Maine “ and the one year update  of 
that report . That evidence is all around us, with rising sea levels swallowing coastal 
infrastructure, a warming Gulf of Maine driving dramatic shifts in fisheries like lobster 
with impending populatio n declines, weather extremes from downpours and drought 
inflicting dire hardships  on Maine farms, insect pests and warming altering the 
character of Maine’s future forest s, fading winters and winter whiplash challenging a 
recreation industry, and heat and Lyme disease altering all aspects of the lives of 
Mainers. However, as these indicators of a rapidly changing climate are 
accelerat ing, so too are the solutions. The Maine Won ’t Wait Progress Report  this 
past year  makes clear the many ways in which Maine is responding and the many  
opportunities for Maine people to engage in this work. There is no greater call for 
service and experiential learning  for all ages tha n for opportunities to be engaged in 
Testimony of Ivan J. Fernandez, University of Maine Climate Change Institute, 
before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affair s of the 1 31st Maine 
Legislature, in support of LD 142, “An Act to Fund Climate -related Service Work ” 
 
 
2 
 this work and to develop the skills and work force for a thriving Maine future. I see 
this every day as a professor and as a citizen here in Maine.  
It is for this reason that I urge your support of LD 142. This bill will invest in the 
development of the Maine Climate Corps to provide the type of experiential learning 
noted above, and growth in this program will allow these  opportunities to gr ow 
beyond any one sector or region in Maine. These opportunities exist throughout 
Maine, from Fort Kent to Kittery, in all socio -economic settings, and from coastal 
fishing communities to central Maine farml and to interior forest  neighborhoods. I am 
personal ly enthusiastic  about how this program can grow along with its impact  on 
assuring a resilient Maine . As is ty pically the case with science -based en vironmental 
initiatives , the invest ment  costs are far o vershadow ed by the economic value of the 
benefits, let alone the importance of cultivating a thriving and resilient  Maine 
citizen ry.  
These comments are mine alone and  are not o ffered on behalf of University of 
Maine or any other affiliation.  
Thank you.  
1.31.23  
 
