Testimony in Support 
LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate-related Service Work 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
1/31/2023 
Jay McCreight 
Harpswell, Maine 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, I'm testifying today in support of LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate- 
related Service Work. l am Jay McCreight, resident of Harpswell, a coastal and working 
waterfront community. 
It's critical that we do all we can to address the increasingly significant and increasingly harmful 
impacts of climate change on our built infrastructure, industries, natural resources and on our 
most vulnerable residents. 
We're all experiencing the climate-change related effects of more frequent and more severe 
storms with their damaging winds, storm surges overtopping roads and flooding properties, 
and the serious risks these impacts create for our medically vulnerable population, our 
emergency first responders, our industries, properties and residents. We all know about 
extended utility outages, downed trees and utility poles, blocked roads and flooding. And 
we're even seeing more non-storm related flooding due to extreme high tides known as “king 
tides” - the so called “sunny-day flooding. ” These harmful effects are a few examples 
demonstrating why climate-change requires action and the importance of our support to 
accomplish needed action. LD 142 does this. 
The Maine Climate Corps was established last session through LD 1974* in order to provide 
assistance through community collaboration by providing grants, technical assistance and 
training to community service corps programs with the mission of responding to the impacts of 
climate change. 
By passing LD 142, the reach of the Maine Climate Corps will be expanded, allowing more 
communities to receive critical climate-change-related support by providing necessary 
workforce and leadership positions. Especially important is that these efforts will focus on 
“disproportionally affected communities... ” and will“ ....employ persons representing the 
economic and demographic diversity of communities... ” ln addition, the bill’s funding will 
provide Climate Corps workers with a living wage as well as training toward careers we need in 
our state.* 
Appropriately, the focus of Climate Corps projects will be based on community collaboration 
and on specific community-identified needs. interventions must be evidence-based and 
measurable and they must address one or more of the following areas: transportation, energy, 
housing, the coastal zone, public health, land and fresh water preservation, community 
resilience and climate-related education. 
Funding this climate-related service work, as proposed in LD 142, will benefit the entire state 
by allowing for the needed workforce for participating communities as well as assistance for 
evely community through the training materials that will be developed. 
Thank you for your attention and respectfully ask that you vote LD 142 Ought to Pass. 
* http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getPDEasp?paper=SPO706&item=1&snum=130
