Testimony  in support of LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate -related Service Work  
To the Committee on  Education and Cultural Affairs  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate & Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
January 31 , 202 3 
  
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , distinguished members of the  Committe on Education 
and Cultural Affairs . My name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach 
Coordinator at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM), and I am testifying today in 
support of  LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate -related Service Work . 
 
Climate change is a pressing issue for Maine, our nation, and the world, and it will continue to be 
so for the foreseeable future. To adequately confront climate change, mass mobilization in every 
sector of our society is paramount.  Last year, we were excited to see legislation implementing 
the Maine Climate Corps pass, and now it is time to facilitate  the success of that program by 
ensuring that it is funded and equipped to handle the challenges climate change presents in 
Maine.  Not only would a funded Maine Climate Corps Program help to mitigate the negative 
effects of climate change, but it would als o provide an opportunity to conduct projects that would 
strengthen our state’s communities and support historically marginalized populations.  
 
Maine’s Climate Action Plan  
The Maine Won’t Wait  Climate Action Plan, crafted through a bipartisan process in 2020, makes 
clear that substantial work needs to be done in order to prevent the worst outcomes of climate 
change and protect our natural and human communities from climate instability. LD 142 would 
fund a program with aims that parallel the eight core strategies outlined in Maine Won’t Wait,  
ensuring that all of the work conducted by the Climate Corps would contribute to reaching 
Maine’s established climate goals. Further, the Climate Corps also  has an explicit directive to 
pursue projects that advance equity and justice and disproportionately benefit overburdened 
communities in Maine, extending the good work of the Maine Climate Council to communities 
throughout Maine.  
 
Maine Won’t Wait sets amb itious yet achievable climate goals that have been determined by the 
most recent available scientific assessments of our climate. To hit these essential goals in the 
most cost -effective manner, Maine will need to utilize all available human resources, and a 

program such as the Maine Climate Corps would effectively channel those resources toward the 
most -needed climate solutions for Maine.  
 
Support for Communities  
A funded Maine Climate Corps Program would provide a n opportunity to complete important 
service projects where Maine has the most need. Maine’s historically marginalized people and 
regions would be prioritized, and projects would be determined according to a thorough 
systematic index established by a network  of Maine organizations that directly engage with 
climate as an issue area. A recent review  of Americorps program efficacy conservatively 
estimated an average $2.02 return for each dollar invested in Americorps projects and found that 
Americorps participants, on average, are 27% more likely to find a job after service than non -
participants. The  benefit of a Maine Climate Corps Program to participants and the communities 
they serve is evident.  
 
Opportunities for Mainers  
A Maine Climate Corps Program would provide ample opportunity for Mainers, particularly our 
state’s youth, to engage with our s tate, our environment, and our climate in a substantive and 
rewarding way. This would help with promoting youth retention in state, encouraging continued 
long-term engagement with Maine’s natural resources, and growing a culture of stewardship that 
will be  needed to preserve our state’s beauty and productivity for generations to come. An 
analysis of Americorps members in Maine from 1994 to 2021 shows that 34% of respondents 
moved to Maine for service, and more than half of those stayed after their program d ue to ties 
developed in state. In order to actualize the full range of benefits the Maine Climate Corps would 
provide for Maine, the program must be adequately funded and staffed with appropriate benefits 
for participants.  
 
Further, as climate change becomes an increasingly primary focus for our federal government 
and national organizations, funding opportunities for climate solutions are rapidly growing. 
Maine can only take advantage of these new funding opportunities if we have the resources and 
capacity to channel funds effectively. A Climate Corps Program such as the one that would be 
funded by this legislation would provide eligibility for Maine to take advantage of federal funds 
and conduct beneficial work that otherwise would not be able to happe n. 
 
For these reasons we urge the Committee to support the passage of this important climate bill. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I welcome any questions that you may have.  
 
