Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 142: An Act to Fund Climate-related Service Work  
  
To: Sen. Joseph Rafferty, Representative Michael Brennan, and Members of the Committee on     
      Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
From: Mark Stelmack, Portland Climate Action Team 
 
Date: January 31, 2023 
  
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs:  
 
My name is Mark Stelmack, I am an Environmental Engineer and I live in Portland, the largest 
and most diverse city in the state . I am testifying on behalf of the Portland Climate Action Team 
(PCAT), a volunteer group actively involved in climate mitigation projects in Portland. As an 
environmental engineer I am keenly aware of the growing climate crisis impacting our society 
and volunteer my personal time helping to implement activities designed to confront the 
impacts. I am writing to testify in support of LD 142.  
  
PCAT recognizes that the Maine Climate Corps will: 
 Provide the human power to conduct climate projects on the ground throughout the state 
by reaching out to Maine residents to conduct beneficial energy assessments and assist 
with energy efficiency and water conservation activities.  
 Help mitigate the negative effects of climate change through e ngagement in projects that 
promote renewable energy production, energy conservation, and efficient transmission 
and transportation of energy .  
 Strengthen our state's communities and support historically marginalized populations 
facing the impacts of climate change by working to increase residential energy efficiency 
statewide and providing services that promote healthy and energy efficient homes for 
senior citizens and low-income families.  
 Provide climate ambassadors who understand the challenges involved in immigrant 
communities, different languages, and different cultures. The need to connect to 
immigrant families is a vitally important issue statewide and particularly in Portland, 
Maine’s largest and most ethnically diverse city.  
 Provide a living allowance at a livable wage for service members and the certification 
and/or job training in the environmental and clean energy sectors to kick-start careers. 
This provides members with tangible skills and helps build their resume for a future 
career.  
In addition, the Maine Climate Corps can:  
 Collaborate with established support programs in Maine such as Color of Climate (COC) 
which centers youth of Color and their experiences and perspectives on climate change 
and environmental justice. COC’s mission is to center Black, Indigenous, and people of 
color (BIPOC) youth voices, experiences, and narratives within the climate change 
crises and within environmental justice issues, especially because BIPOC communities 
and individuals are often the most impacted by these issues. https://gcsmaine.org/color-
of-climate  
 
 Help bring the message to Maine residents, in a language they understand, as to why 
the climate is changing, how it is changing, and how we can mitigate its worst impacts 
while adapting to those that will occur.  
 Assist stakeholders including municipal staff with implementing the tangible goals 
established in Portland and South Portland’s joint climate action plan, One Climate 
Future. 
As chair Brennan certainly appreciates, the diversity in many of the state’s largest cities offers 
an untapped potential in the fight against climate change if appropriately managed. Nelson 
Mandela once said, “If you talk to a man in a language he understands, that goes to his head. If 
you talk to him in his own language, that goes to his heart.” 
We ask that you vote to pass LD 142. 
Thank you for reading my testimony.  
