Testimony in support of LD 142, An Act Fund Climate-related Service Work
To: Sen. Joseph Rafferty, Representative Michael Brennan, and Members of the 
Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs
From: Stacie Haines, Volunteer Maine Commissioner, Maine Conservation Voters 
Development Director
 
Good Afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Stacie Haines and I live 
in Augusta. I work at Maine Conservation Voters and I am a state commissioner at 
Volunteer Maine. I am testifying in support of LD 142.
As directed by Maine’s Climate Action Plan, Maine Won’t Wait, Volunteer Maine has 
undergone an extensive project to design and implement a Maine Climate Corps over 
the last few years. 
Maine Won’t Wait highlighted that there is a heightened urgency to address the climate 
crisis that we face right now. The cost of doing nothing is too great for Maine’s 
ecosystems, species, infrastructure, and public health. 
To that end, there is an increased need to add significant human resources to move 
climate action strategies forward in our state. The greatest opportunity for engaging in 
this work with a large group of citizens representing all ages, abilities, and background 
lies with a Climate Corps.
Last year, there was a bill that requested funding for 5 Maine Climate Corps Program 
leadership positions and 20 participants of the program. While the bill passed 
unanimously through the ENR committee, the Climate Corps ended up with funding for 
one leadership position and 4 member positions.
Furthermore, any possibility of federal funding died along with Build Back Better. 
We weren’t dissuaded. Volunteer Maine looked at this as a pilot project year to prove 
the on-the-ground effectiveness of Maine’s Climate Corps. We scaled back our focus 
areas to Energy Education and Outreach and Home Energy Conservation and 
Management. 
Starting in May, 4 service members will serve at Downeast Community Partners, with a 
focus on reducing energy costs of low-income households. Service members will 
engage the community in energy education, collect energy usage data, analyze energy 
savings, and create instructional videos for clients.
The pilot project will help some of Maine's most rural and marginalized communities 
address the climate crisis. Members will receive a livable wage—leading to more equity 
in who can serve—and on-the-job training and weatherization technician skills and 
certifications needed to work at energy efficiency companies.
I am incredibly proud of the work that Volunteer Maine and our partners have done to 
prove the effectiveness of this program through a pilot project. 
It is up to all of you, and other members of the legislature, to decide now if you see it’s 
worth and want it to be implemented on a larger scale.
Please also consider that here in Maine, we need young professionals as a large 
percentage of our workforce is set to retire in the upcoming years. Service opportunities 
have the potential to attract young people to Maine or allow them to stay here.
People who serve in a community tend to set deep roots there. In Maine, 25% of the 
young adults who move here for a year of community service stay to make this state 
their home.
It is a priority for each Climate Corps service member to develop their skills in 
collaboration with Maine’s communities and organizations. This will provide the on-the-
job training that is so desperately needed for young professionals to get to the next level 
in their career pursuits such as the weatherization certification that will be provided 
through the pilot project this year.
Today, I urge you to pass LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate-related Service Work. The 
climate crisis is the most pressing issue of our time. And, this is a well-planned pathway 
forward to implement this critical work that will benefit Maine’s people and our 
environment.
Stacie Haines
AUGUSTA
LD 142
Testimony in support of LD 142, An Act Fund Climate-related Service Work
To: Sen. Joseph Rafferty, Representative Michael Brennan, and Members of the Committee 
On Education and Cultural Affairs
From: Stacie Haines, Volunteer Maine Commissioner, Maine Conservation Voters 
Development Director
 
Good Afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Stacie Haines and I live in Augusta. I work at 
Maine Conservation Voters and I am a state commissioner at Volunteer Maine. I am testifying
in support of LD 142.
As directed by Maine’s Climate Action Plan, Maine Won’t Wait, Volunteer Maine 
has undergone an extensive project to design and implement a Maine Climate Corps 
over the last few years. 
Maine Won’t Wait highlighted that there is a heightened urgency to address the 
climate crisis that we face right now. The cost of doing nothing is too great for 
Maine’s ecosystems, species, infrastructure, and public health. 
To that end, there is an increased need to add significant human resources to move 
climate action strategies forward in our state. The greatest opportunity for engaging in
this work with a large group of citizens representing all ages, abilities, and 
background lies with a Climate Corps.
Last year, there was a bill that requested funding for 5 Maine Climate Corps Program 
leadership positions and 20 participants of the program. While the bill passed unanimously 
through the ENR committee, the Climate Corps ended up with funding for one leadership 
position and 4 member positions.
Furthermore, any possibility of federal funding died along with Build Back Better. 
We weren’t dissuaded. Volunteer Maine looked at this as a pilot project year to prove 
the on-the-ground effectiveness of Maine’s Climate Corps. We scaled back our focus 
areas to Energy Education and Outreach and Home Energy Conservation and 
Management. 
Starting in May, 4 service members will serve at Downeast Community Partners, with
a focus on reducing energy costs of low-income households. Service members will 
engage the community in energy education, collect energy usage data, analyze energy
savings, and create instructional videos for clients.
The pilot project will help some of Maine's most rural and marginalized communities 
address the climate crisis. Members will receive a livable wage—leading to more 
equity in who can serve—and on-the-job training and weatherization technician skills 
and certifications needed to work at energy efficiency companies.
I am incredibly proud of the work that Volunteer Maine and our partners have done to prove 
the effectiveness of this program through a pilot project. 
It is up to all of you, and other members of the legislature, to decide now if you see it’s worth 
and want it to be implemented on a larger scale.
Please also consider that here in Maine, we need young professionals as a large percentage 
of our workforce is set to retire in the upcoming years. Service opportunities have the 
potential to attract young people to Maine or allow them to stay here.
People who serve in a community tend to set deep roots there. In Maine, 25% of the 
young adults who move here for a year of community service stay to make this state 
their home.
It is a priority for each Climate Corps service member to develop their skills in 
collaboration with Maine’s communities and organizations. This will provide the 
on-the-job training that is so desperately needed for young professionals to get to the 
next level in their career pursuits such as the weatherization certification that will be 
provided through the pilot project this year.
Today, I urge you to pass LD 142, An Act to Fund Climate-related Service Work. The climate 
crisis is the most pressing issue of our time. And, this is a well-planned pathway forward to 
implement this critical work that will benefit Maine’s people and our environment.

