131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 30 
Senator Stacy Brenner
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
(207) 287-1515
Stacy.Brenner@legislature.maine.gov
Fax: (207) 287-1585 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Website: www.mainesenate.orgTestimony in favor of LD 142, “An Act to Fund Climate-related Service Work”
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs, I am Senator Stacy Brenner. I represent Senate 
District 30 which includes Gorham and most of Scarborough.
Last session, I was able to help pass LD 722, Resolve to Study the Establishment of the Maine 
Climate Corps, which led to the establishment of the Maine Climate Corps Program as part of 
the Maine Commission for Community Service. The next step in the its growth and effectiveness 
is funding dedicated positions for individuals who will carry out this important program. In 
December of 2020, the Maine Climate Council released “ Maine Won’t Wait: A Four-Year Plan 
for Climate Action,” which outlined numerous strategies across multiple industries of ways to 
address climate change in the state. One of those strategies was to form the Maine Climate Corps 
in order to engage our communities through volunteering and service. 
Addressing the climate crisis in our state requires a team effort. One of the best ways to 
implement these strategies is through community engagement and experience. Providing funding 
to create positions for the Maine Climate Corps would give the corps the freedom to be able to 
build these teams to help our beautiful state heal from climate crisis. Not only does this program 
directly impact our community in positive ways, it also reaches out to the youth in order to better 
prepare us for the future. This program provides an invaluable educational opportunity for 
students across several subject areas. By training its volunteers on-site and giving them a hands-
on experience, students will build on their professional development while also providing acts of 
service for their community. 
As a farmer, Chair of the Committee of Environment and Natural Resources, and a strong 
advocate in the effort to address the PFAS crisis, I have a firm understanding of the effectiveness 
of engaging the community in our work to mitigate climate change and build a green workforce. 
However, the only way to make this possible is through funding. Many of Maine’s industries 
rely on youth sparked with a passion for green jobs. Contributing to strategies to save our state 
from climate change is worth every penny. 
I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 142. Thank you for your consideration. 
