 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1322, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Right to Know 
Advisory Committee Concerning Remote Participation 
 
April 10, 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name 
is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland 
County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County 
Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in support of 
LD 1322. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1322 do?  LD 1322 implements the recommendations of the Right to Know Advisory 
Committee by adding language to the law authorizing a public body to adopt a written policy governing not only 
the conditions upon which members of the public body may participate remotely in public proceedings, but also 
how members of the public may participate in a public proceeding by remote methods. Additionally, this bill 
clarifies that the officers of a political subdivisions, including county commissioners, may adopt one remote 
participation policy that applies to all public bodies under its jurisdiction unless such officers specifically 
authorize an individual public body within its jurisdiction to adopt its own policy. 
 
MCCA supports the proposed changes in LD 1322.  Maine’s counties are large, including the largest county 
east of the Mississippi River. When meetings are in person, it can be difficult for some members of the public to 
participate given the travel involved. For this reason, MCCA has supported the expanded ability of public bodies 
to meet remotely and allow public participation on a remote basis.  To the extent that LD 1322 expands access to 
participation in public proceedings by permitting political subdivisions, including counties, to adopt policies 
permitting remote participation in public proceedings, our Association supports this bill. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
