1PO Box 7860
Portland, ME 04112
(207) 774-5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, Esq.
LD 1032 - Ought Not To Pass
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine To Specify the Qualifications of Electors
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS
March 22, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to reject LD 1032. 
The ACLU of Maine has a deep commitment to protecting and expanding both voting 
rights and immigrants’ rights. We firmly believe that our democracy is stronger when as many 
people as possible have a voice. That is why we have already urged you this session to consider 
ways to expand and strengthen, rather than constrict and exclude, participation in our voting 
process. 
Although voting in Maine has always been restricted to citizens, this has not always been 
true across the country. Between 1776 and 1926, 40 states and federal territories allowed non-
citizens to vote in elections and hold public offices.1 It was only when fear and xenophobia took 
hold, marked by even the Washington Post commenting on the marked and increasing 
deterioration in the quality of immigration,2  that states began to restrict voting to citizens only. 
Everyone who pays taxes, lives in community, and sends their children to local schools 
should have a voice in how their community is governed. If towns and cities in Maine wish to 
1 See Olivia B. Waxman, Non-Citizens Used to Be Able to Vote in U.S. Elections. Here’s What Changed, Time (Jul. 18, 
2017), available at http://time.com/4859478/immigrant-voters-history/
2 Id.
amend their charters to give their residents a voice in municipal elections, the legislature should 
not create a Constitutional barrier. The committee should not give in to the urge to stigmatize 
and de-value non-citizens, and should instead turn its attention to proactive legislation that 
expands rights and freedoms. 
We are proud that Maine is a leader on voting rights, and urge this committee to protect 
that tradition. Please reject this harmful bill.
