TO:The Honorable Craig HickmanThe Honorable Laura Supica, Co-ChairsMembers of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
DATE:March 22, 2023
RE:LD 1032 RESOLUTION Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Specifythe Qualifications of Electors
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committeeon Veterans and Legal Affairs.
My name is Will Hayward.  I’m a resident of Portland. I am here today as Advocacy Program Coordinator
on behalf of the League of Women Voters of Maine. T
 
he League of Women Voters is a consensus-basedmembership organization. At this time, we have no position on the merits of allowing non-citizens tovote in local elections. Therefore, I am testifying neither for nor against LD 1032.
At present, both the Constitution of Maine—as tostate elections — and Maine law—as to local12
elections — provide that voters shall be citizens of the United States. Maine law appears to be clear onthe qualifications of electors, meaning those who are eligible to vote in elections. The broader text of LD1032 suggests that the focus of the proposed Resolution is to mandate in the Maine Constitution thatnon-citizens may not vote in county, municipal, or other local elections in the state.
Today, citizenship is a requirement of both federal elections and state elections in all 50 states. A smallnumber of localities in certain states, such as Maryland and Vermont, permit certain non-citizens to votein some local elections. In Maine, our law does not afford non-citizens the right to vote in local elections,nor is the League aware of any pending measures that would seek to authorize it. For now, the merits ofwhether, and under what circumstances, non-citizens should be granted a limited right to vote in localelections remains largely a hypothetical issue for future discussion and consideration.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
221-A M.R.S.A. sec. 111(1)1Art. II, sec. 1
PO 18187
Portland, ME 04112
info@lwvme.org
207.622.0256
www.lwvme.org

