1 
* :»=;1':.~.»)\ 
.»_ 
. 
Q; ~:i
W 
Eric Brakey 131“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 1553, An Act to Mitigate So-called Forever Chemicals 
in Decommissioned Schools by Establishing a Fund for Mitigation 
Projects 
Before the State and Local Government Committee 
Friday, April 28, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government, l am Senator Eric Brakey, 
representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. 
Thank you for your attention and consideration today as l present L.D. 
1553, An Act to Mitigate So-cal/ed Forever Chemicals in Decommissioned 
Schools by Establishing a Fund for Mitigation Projects. 
Today, the standards for building construction are much stricter than when 
many of our existing school facilities went up. And as the old wisdom goes, 
what goes up must come down. 
When older school facilities are decommissioned and replaced, the parts 
per billion standards established in state statutes for certain so-called - 
forever chemicals exposed during school decommissioning (like 
poiychlorinated biphenyl compounds and contaminants) are significantly 
lower than federal requirements. As a result, this policy has imposed a 
costly unfunded mandate on municipalities decommissioning retired 
schools. 
At the request of Auburn city officials and with the co-sponsorships of the 
entire bipartisan Auburn delegation, l have sponsored L.D. 1553 to propose
the creation of a Decommissioned Schools Contamination Mitigation Fund 
to assist with financing the mitigation of contamination from 
decommissioned school buildings and land from these forever chemicals. 
The fund, which would be administered by the Maine Municipal Bond Bank, 
could make loans to school administration units (SAUs) and at least 
annually, the Department of Education would provide a project priority list to 
the bank. Loans to SAUs would only be made if the mitigation project was 
certified by DOE as eligible for financing and the loan could not carry an 
interest rate higher than 0%. 
The Maine Legislature has chosen to place strict limits on these chemicals, 
and that should not result in a completely unfunded mandate on 
municipalities. 
l will gladly take any questions you have to the best of my ability. Thank 
you for your time and consideration.
