& 
15"‘ fﬁfﬁ 
‘"*.: '1 vi. -r 
Lisa M. Keirn 3 State House Station 
Senator, District I9 i‘ Augusta, Maine 04333 
Assistant Republican Leader THE MAINE SENATE 
l3 l st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Lisa Keim before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
LD 530, An Act to Facilitate the Installation of Safe Haven Baby Boxes at Hospitals, Law Enforcement 
Facilities and Fire Departments 
March 2, 2023 
Good Afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary. I am Lisa Keim, and I proudly represent the citizens of Senate District 19, which includes much of 
Northern Oxford County and Southern Franklin County. I am here to testify in favor of LD 530, “An Act to Facilitate 
the Installation of Safe Haven Baby Boxes at Hospitals, Law Enforcement Facilities and Fire Departments. ” 
As you know, on July 15, 2021 the 130th Legislature passed LD 560, “An Act to Amend the Safe Haven Laws.” LD 
560 amended the safe haven laws regarding abandoned children by including a safe haven baby box to the list of safe 
havens that a person may deliver a newborn child to. The bill required the Department of Health and Human Services 
to adopt rules governing the design, installation and use of safe haven baby boxes. Since passage a year and a half 
ago, this rulemaking has not taken place. 
I have been eager for DHHS rulemaking to begin because of community demand in my district. The Rumford Fire 
Department, soon to be situated in an ideal community location for this lifesaving apparatus, is eager to install a Safe 
Haven Baby Box. Construction on Rumford’s new ﬁre department station will begin this spring. Including the Baby 
Box in the initial building design is more sensible and cost effective than converting a space at a later time. After 
attempts to get information regarding Baby Box implementation rules from the DHHS and getting no definitive 
answers on timing, Fire Chief Chris Reed reached out for my help. 
I sent a formal inquiry to Director Landry requesting information regarding this rulemaking last August. The 
department ’s reply was basically, we’ll let you know when we get around to it. Specifically, I was told the 
Department did, “not have a substantive update/timeline. .. right now; we are still at the beginning stages of rule 
development. ” How could it be that more than a year after the bi1l’s passage, the Department was still at the 
beginning stages of rule development and have no timeline as to when they will even begin inquiry for this project? 
In a remarkable comparison, the state of Kentucky also passed the Safe Haven Baby Box law in 2021. Since that time 
sixteen have been installed, and these are already making a difference. Just last month, the ﬁrst infant was 
anonymously left at one of Kentucky ’s surrender locations and the Fire Department staff was able to tend to the child 
within 90 seconds. The value of Safe Haven Baby Boxes should not be understated. To save the life of even one 
infant, is enough. 
I ask that you support LD 530 so the construction of Safe Haven Baby boxes in our state will no longer be delayed. 
Thank you. 
GOV8I‘i'Zl7Z€I'7f OVLWSILQ/ ‘If Committee 
State House (207) 287-1505 * Fax (207) 28.7-1’ 527 * Toll Free 1—8(7()~423-6900 * TTY 71] 
Lisa. KeiIiz@!egisl(1tz:/ ‘e. nmfne.gov * legislature.mafnegov/isenale
