 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 530 – Ought  Not To Pass  
 
An Act to Facilitate the Installation of Safe Haven Baby Boxes at Hospitals, 
Law Enforcement Facilities and Fire Departments  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
March 2 , 202 3 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on  Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede , and I am 
Policy Counsel  for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to oppose 
LD 530, legislation that would allow medical service providers, law enforcement 
agency or fire departments to operate  so-called “safe haven baby boxes” without 
safety requirements or regulations to protect infants.  
 
The current statute allows for “safe haven baby boxes ,” identifies where the boxes 
can be placed,  and requires the Department of Health and Human Se rvices  to 
promulgate rules governing the boxes. This bill removes the rulemaking 
requirement and allows the boxes to have only an alarm  that notifies various 
emergency services when a baby is placed in the box , with no further requirements.  
This is done despite a dearth of evidence that current processes to give up custody of 
one’s child are insufficient, or that creating boxes to leave children in are subject to 
any demand by parents.  
 
It is revealing that in  states where the purported ‘safe haven’ boxes are more 
common, such as Indiana and Ohio , the boxes are governed by lengthy, 
comprehensive statutes and rulemaking requirements stating how the boxes must 
be maintained , installed , and heated  to ensure safety , and how the anonymity of 
people using the boxes must  be preserved . See, e.g. , I.C. 31 -34-2.5-1 (providing 
Indiana’s statute governing ‘safe haven’ boxes) ; R.C. 2151.3532 (providing Ohio’s). 
These statutory schemes implicitly acknowledge that safe surrend er is only safe if 
the boxes are held to certain requirements  and that the boxes are only useful if the 
people using them  can retain anonymity.1 By removing the rulemaking requirement  
 
1 The national Safe Haven Baby Boxes organization also echoes these concerns. See Safe Haven Baby Boxes, 
Mission Statement , https://shbb.org/about -us (stating that safe haven baby boxes provide “safe, legal, anonymous” 
services).  
  
 
and declining to impose any further requirements or standards, this bill makes it 
possible for boxes to operate without adhering to any safety requirements and in 
locations where the identity of the person using them will be obvious to passersby. 
Such  boxes could not be called  “safe havens” at all.  
 
Finally, we urge this committee to remember that v irtually every case of infant 
abandonment signals that a state’s healthcare and social service system has failed. 
Surely a well -functioning system would enable a person to either prevent un wanted 
pregnancy; to end an unwanted pregnancy safely and early; or, if a person decides 
to carry to term, either keep the child or place the child safely and swiftly  for 
adoption. Safe surrender laws , no matter how comprehensive,  are no substitute for 
comprehensive sex education in schools, family planning, or sexual health services. 
They are no substitute for postpartum depression treatment, stable and safe 
housing, or affordable childcare. As the committee considers this bill, we ask that it 
also conside rs the myriad other ways this legislature can act to keep families 
together. We urge you to vote ought  not to pass . 
 
 
