Patrick Corey
Windham
LD 530
Good Afternoon. Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Patrick Corey and I live in Windham. I am here 
today to speak in SUPPORT of LD 530, An Act to Facilitate the Installation of Safe 
Haven Baby Boxes at Hospitals, Law Enforcement Facilities and Fire Departments.
In the 130th Maine Legislature I was the primary sponsor of LD 560, An Act To 
Amend the Safe Haven Laws which provided that safe haven baby boxes were a 
viable method for surrendering a baby to State custody. This was a law that received 
the unanimous endorsement of this committee and then went under the hammer in 
both the House and Senate. From there, the bill received $14,174 General Fund 
dollars in the 2021-2022 budget cycle so that the Department of Health and Human 
Services would "adopt rules governing the design, installation and use of safe haven 
baby boxes to ensure necessary safety specifications are met, including but not limited
to an alarm that alerts both the facility where the safe haven baby box is located and a 
public safety answering point when a baby has been placed inside."
I and others have reached out to DHHS which did not result in satisfactory answers or
answers at all regarding where they were at in creating the rules. I hope they are here 
today so we can learn where they are in the process of doing what they are required to
do by statute and received funding for.  
Ten states have baby boxes available so I imagine there is adequate information 
publicly available to write rules. In these states babies are being surrendered in this 
manner so there is clearly a need. 
While I’d love for the Department to write the rules as directed today and while I do 
not want to wait for this bill to become law because it could cost the life of an 
inappropriately abandoned baby, I urge this committee to take action because we 
don't have a timeframe and almost a year and a half has passed by since LD 560 took 
effect.
This committee is capable of writing the rules. When I sat in the Legislature we did it 
all the time by collaborating with departments or through good OPLA analysis.
Thank you for your consideration. I can answer any questions you may have. 

