 
 
 
April 4th, 2023  
 
Senator  Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 1167: An Act to Require Communications Service 
Providers to Prorate Customer Bills for Cancellation and Allow a Reduction in Service for a Customer 
with an Outstanding Balance  
 
Senator  Lawrence , Representative  Zeigler, and members of the  Energy, Utilities, and Technology  Committee:   
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in opposition to  L.D. 1167.  
 
We believe L.D. 1167 is unnecessary and goes further than intended , and we do not believe this is a common 
practice . The  Chamber does not believe this is an issue or policy conversation that should fall within the 
jurisdiction of the PUC and anytime you have an agency tasked with creating rules for a policy area that they 
have no regulatory authority over is of concern to t he business community in Maine. We believe  that the state 
should let businesses run their businesses the way they see fit, not create a uniform policy that all companies 
must follow. Some providers do it and others don’t, we have the confidence in the comp anies to make those 
decisions rather than the government doing so. Regardless of what service is being provided, there is a lot of 
competition in this area for the consumer dollar. We also have concerns over the current definition of, 
“Communication Servic e Provider” and believe it is unclear and ambiguous. Additionally, we believe there is 
an argument to be made for preemption at the federal level especially from wireless and internet access 
perspective.  
 
We would respectfully ask the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 1167. Thank you.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
