CO/\/\CAST 
Comcast Testimony on LD1167 
An Act to Require Communications Service Providers to Prorate Customer Bills for 
Cancellation and Allow a Reduction in Service for a Customer with an Outstanding 
' 
Balance 
Chair Lawrence, Chair Ziegler, and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to offer the following testimony opposed to LD 1167. My name is Chris Hodgdon 
I am Comcast’s Vice President of Government Affairs here in Maine. Comcast serves 16 Maine 
communities, in the Mid Coast region from Freeport to Woolwich and along the New Hampshire border 
from Kittery to Sanford. We currently offer our broadband, video, voice and mobile services to more 
than 69,000 Maine homes, businesses and institutions. We also offer a streaming video service through 
NBCUniversal ’s Peacock which has more than 20 million subscribers nationally including many 
thousands in Maine. 
As a preliminary matter customers may terminate Comcast’ s Xﬁnity services, including our Video, Internet Access, 
Wireless and Wired Voice and Home Security, at any time for any reason. Customer ’s must notify us that they 
want to terminate in one of the following ways: (a) mail a written notice to our local business office; 
(b) send an electronic notice to the email address speciﬁed on www.xfmity.com; (c) provide notice in 
person at a service center; or (d) call our customer service number during normal business hours. 
Service termination is subject to the return of any Comcast owned equipment and the applicability of any 
minimum term agreement or hardware ﬁnancing. Since Comcast’s Xﬁnity Service is paid in advance this often 
results in a pro rata credit due to the customer once the service is terminated. This policy of offering pro rata credits 
for our services has been Comcast’s policy for many years and did not change with the 2020 enactment of LD 203 1. 
NBCUniversal ’s Peacock streaming service which is available at two service tiers of $4.99 per month and $9.99 
per month, is offered on a Whole billing period basis which means that if a consumer cancels Peacock the service 
continues to be available until the end of the billing period. 
Comcast believes LD 1167 would be preempted by federal law. Voice over Internet Protocol has been held to be 
an “information service” under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in Charter (MAD v. Lange in 2018. Mass 
market Broadband lntemet Access Services is also preempted from state-level regulation as an interstate 
information service and has repeatedly and consistently been held as such in federal courts. 
Despite it being Comcast’s policy to offer a pro rata credit, if due, upon service termination we express the 
following concerns about LD 1167. Putting aside the substantial questions about whether federal law preempts 
the application of this Bill to Broadband Internet Access Services, Wireless Services or Voice Over Internet 
Protocol services it is inappropriate to enact this language in MRSA 35-A. Consumer protection issues suchas
those addressed in LD 1167 would more properly be situated in MRSA 10 under the authority of the Attorney 
General. This is particularly true because many of the services described in the Bill are not common carrier 
services nor are they provided by utilities under the jurisdiction of the Maine Public Utilities Commission. For 
example MRSA 35-A’s deﬁnition of “public utility” expressly excludes many “mobile 
telecommunications services, ” including Comcast’s Xﬁnity Mobile and federal law expressly preempts 
the imposition of “utility” and/or “common carrier” regulation of certain “video” services, including 
cable service and many “data” services are classiﬁed as non-common carrier “private carriage ” services 
under federal law and thus carmot be subject to common carrier/public utility regulation. 
In addition to being more properly situated in MRSA 10, the “Commerce and Trade” Title and under 
Attorney General jurisdiction the deﬁnition of “Communications Service” uses terms that are vague and 
ambiguous. The terms “wireline voice” , “satellite ” , “data” , “fixed wireless data” or “video retail” lack 
any context or deﬁnition and seemed to not be inclusive of many common mass market services. 
Should the legislature choose to advance LD 1167 it is important that these terms be clearly deﬁned and 
inclusive of the many competing services offered in the marketplace to avoid confusion and dispute. 
Ln addition to jurisdictional and deﬁnitional issues, LD 1167 needs clariﬁcation to avoid being 
needlessly and unfairly disruptive for providers like Comcast which allow service termination at any 
time and provides pro rata credits when due. For example Section 2 of the Bill which requires service 
cancelation, does not account for legitimate business policies which require customers to retum provider 
owned equipment such as modems before service cancellation. Additionally, many services include a 
term contract or the ﬁnancing of hardware such as wireless handsets through the provider. Customers 
should not be allowed to cancel service until equipment is returned in good working order or the terms 
of ﬁnanced hardware have been met. Furthermore, customers in the phase immediately before they have 
their services terminated within the next month and requiring us to downgrade them would create 
signiﬁcant challenges because it would be occurring mid-billing cycle. 
Similarly, Section 3 of the Bill which addresses with reduction of service should be clariﬁed to make it 
clear that a customer ’s right to request a reduction of service is limited to a service offering that is 
currently available to the provider ’s other customers. It is important that this provision not be 
interpreted to allow customers to choose any level of service or combination of services they prefer but 
rather choose a different level of service from among the providers current offerings. Section 3 also 
creates uncertainty about whether a customer can request a reduction in services when a customer has 
been disconnected for nonpayment and is no longer accruing new charges. In this instance the customer 
is still considered a customer and has not been completely discomected for nonpayment, rather their 
service offers limited functionality and new charges don’t accrue. Customers in this situation should not 
be allowed to use the rights included in Section 3 to receive a reduction of service and accrue additional 
charges on their account. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments regarding LD 1167. Comcast looks forward to 
working with the sponsor and other stakeholders to address these concerns and improve this legislation. I 
would be happy to answer any questions that you may have.
