- 
-,~;¢. _ ;, STATE OF MAINE _,.-3 . 
_ _ 
_ [5 
PUBLIC UT|LlTlES COMMISSION »~'5>j.:r.: 
gig, 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE omecroa 
Patrick J. Scully' 
COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
-Neither for Nor Against _ 
LD 1167, An Act to Require Communications Service Providers to Prorate 
Customer Bills for Cancellation and Allow a Reduction in Service 
for a Customer with an Outstanding Balance 
April 4, 2023.
_ 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 1167, An Act to Require Communications Service Providers to Proratc . 
Customer Bills for Cancellation and Allow a Reduction in Service for a Customer with an Outstanding 
Balance on behalf of the Maine Public Utilities Commission (Commission). . 
Section 3 of LD 1167 directs the Commission to adopt rules that require a provider of communications 
service or a cable television company to reduce, at a customer ’s request, the service provided to that 
customer regardless of whether the customer has an outstanding balance at the time of the request. The 
Commission is concerned with this directive because (1) we largely do not have regulatory authority 
over these entitiesl; (2) the deﬁnition of “communications service” is ambiguous; and (3) there may be 
preemption issues with this kind of oversight by the Commission. 
The Commission has little regulatory oversight of providers of communications service and no 
oversight of cable television companies. Requiring the adoption of rules regarding the services they 
provide to customers is giving the Commission oversight over matters and entities for which it has no 
expertise or mechanisms to address. This rulemaking would likely increase the number of complaints 
the Commission receives from customers of these providers without the ability to resolve these 
customer concerns. However, this increase in customer requests may still require additional staff within 
our Consumer Assistance and Safety Division to handle the inﬂux of customer contacts the 
Commission will receive if LD 1167 was enacted. 
The bill provides a deﬁnition for “communications service, ” which raises more questions. A similar 
deﬁnition for “communications service” is found in 35-A M.R.S. §§ 9202 and 94023 , but this language 
is applicable to the Connectlvlaine Authority/Maine Comiectivity Authority, not the Public Utilities 
1 
The Commission does have some jurisdiction over “wireline voice” to the extent the entity is a provider of last resort 
service. 
Z LD 1167 deﬁnes “communication service” as cellular or wireless telecommunication, Wireline voice, satellite, data, 
ﬁxed wireless data or video retail service. 
3 Sections 9202(3) and 9402(2) define “communications service” to mean any wireline voice, satellite, data, ﬁxed 
wireless data or video retail service or cellular voice or data service. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony — LD 1167 April 4, 2023 
Commission. For example, is the term “satellite ” meant only to apply to satellite phone service or is it 
meant to apply to video and internet as Well? What kind of data is captured under this deﬁnition? 
Finally, depending on Whatservices are captured by the tenn “communications service” there may he 
instances in which the Commission is preempted from any oversight by federal law. The Commission 
has not fully evaluated the preemption question but raises it as a possible complication with this bill. 
If the Committee is interested in pursuing requiring a pro rata credit for the cancellation of 
communications service or allowing customers to reduce their communications or cable service, the 
Commission suggests amending LD" 
1167 to remove any Commission oversight over theseservices 
and perhaps including such provisions in a different Title in statute with an agency that may have the 
ability to oversee these matters. ,' 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the Work session.
2
