ciioii 
April 4, 2023 
The Honorable Mark Lawrence 
The Honorable S. Paige Zeigler 
Co-Chairs, Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology- 
Maine Legislature 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Co-Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler: 
On behalf of CTlA@ , the trade association for the wireless communications industry, I write to 
oppose LD 1167 dealing with the proration of communications ’ customer bills and the 
reduction in service at a customer ’s request. This legislation is unnecessary as wireless 
providers offer consumers numerous options for service, including no contract plans and pay- 
as-you-go offerings, and work with their customers when issues may arise because the 
competitive wireless marketplace requires it. The bill is also preempted by federal law. 
The wireless industry has been at the forefront of addressing consumer demands and changes 
in the wireless industry. For example, CTlA’s Consumer Code for Wireless Service has been an 
integral part of delivering superior customer service to wireless consumers since 2003.‘ The 
Code — followed in all 50 states — has helped consumers make informed decisions when 
selecting a wireless plan and has contributed to the continued competitiveness within the 
industry. The Code also gives wireless providers the flexibility to quickly respond to changes in 
consumer demand. . 
Wireless carriers that are signatories to the Code, including AT&T, T-Mobile, UScellular, and 
Verizon, have committed to voluntarily adhere to a set of industry principles. These principles 
include agreeing to disclose to consumers at the point-of-sale or on their websites whether a 
fixed-term contract is required and its duration; the trial period during which a consumer may 
cancel service without an early termination fee; and providing ready access to customer 
service. CTIA periodically reviews the Code to ensure it reflects the continued innovation 
within the wireless industry and the needs of consumers. 
1 
See httpszf/' www.ctEa.ogg!th§;v;1@ies§;jrgglustrgrjiridg§jrg;y;_§Q_rn¢_ nﬂ§n3gn_*§/_c_Qr2sumer~code~for-wireless; 
,3e;r_\_/i _<:_e (last accessed Mar 3, 2023). 
1400 16th Street, NW - 
Suite 600 Y 
Washington,DC 20036 - 
www.ctia.org
In addition, wireless providers seek to address the needs of customers because of the 
competitive nature of the industry that provides consumers with a choice of providers. For 
example, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has found that more than 9 out of 
10 Americans have a choice of three or more 4G providers. That’s because there are nearly 100 
mobile providers, resellers, and MVNOs nationwide. This competition not only provides 
consumers with a choice of providers, but it has also driven down prices. in fact, Americans 
are paying less for wireless, including unlimited data plans that are 43 percent cheaper than in 
2010. The wireless industry ’s intense competition continues to bring lower prices-—even in the 
face of historic inflation. While consumers have faced price increases for 94 percent of tracked 
goods and sen/ices nationwide, the average prices of wireless sen/ice decreased. 
Moreover, wireless providers offer a wide range of plans with different price points. These 
plans include “all you can use” plans, fixed contract plans, “pay-as-you go” or prepaid 
options, and month-to-month plans. These service options are provided at different price 
points so that consumers can choose the option that works best for them. A recent report 
observed that wireless has been “a significant factor in bridging the digital divide” in part 
because of wireless service providers ’ “varied and attractive pricing tiers.” With prices 
declining and wireless providers incentivized to respond to consumer demands amid fierce 
competition, it is unnecessary to regulate wireless providers as mandated by LD 1167. 
Furthermore, the bill’s credit or rebate requirement amounts to wireless rate regulation, 
which is preempted by federal law. Under the federal Communications Act, “no State . . . shall 
have any authority to regulate the. . . rates charged by any commercial mobile service or any 
private mobile service, ” i.e., by any wireless sen/ice provider? The credit or rebate 
requirement, if enacted, would likely constitute unlawful state regulation of wireless rates.A 
mandated credit or rebate amounts to a reduction in the price that wireless providers may 
charge. The Maine Public Utilities Commission treats rebates as a form of rates subject to 
regulation. “ While the First Circuit recently upheld a 2020 Maine law that requires cable 
providers to offer customers a pro rata credit or rebate upon cancellation, Section 332 of the 
federal Communications Act governs wireless sen/ice including preemption issues, and the 
court expressly distinguished the narrower scope of federal preemption of state cable rate 
2 Multicultural Media, Telecom & Internet Council and CTIA, Wireless in Communities of Color: Bridging 
the Digital Divide, at 6 (July 2022), 
rilt@_s-Qj;il<>l9r~Ju§;g;,_ 0_g;;_5,;;§j 
3 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(3)(A). 
“ See, e.g., 2013 Me. PUC LEXIS 37, *12 (establishing the rebates that a gas utility service will provide to 
customers); 2009 Me. PUC LEXIS 1308, at *2 (stating that the sen/ice quality index rebate “is an integral 
part of the rate structure and rates of FairPoint NNE in Maine”).
regulation from the broad federal preemption of state regulation of wireless rates. The court 
suggested that while the Cable Act only preempts regulation of rates for “the provision of 
senrice, ” wireless preemption reaches “rates charged” generally by wireless providers.5 State 
regulation of broadband pricing is also preempted because such regulation would disrupt the 
federal policy of nonregulation of broadband and because federal law occupies the field of 
regulation of broadband. 
Finally, therequirement to “reduce the service” upon customer request is unclear and 
unnecessary. It is unclear what it would mean for wireless providers to “reduce the service” of 
a customer upon request, regardless of outstanding bill balances. The bill is also unclear on 
whether it would, in effect, bar providers from pausing service to non-paying customers by 
forcing them to continue “reducing ” a non-paying customer ’s service indefinitely and/or 
forcing them to create service tiers below their most basic tier, simply so they could “reduce” 
service upon request. The bill appears aimed at an issue that does not exist for wireless 
providers, which do not require customers to maintain a particular plan because of unpaid 
bills. 
The wireless marketplace is highly competitive, which affords consumers the choice of 
providers, rates, and plans that best suit their needs. Because of this intense competition- 
which has also driven down prices for consumers - wireless providers work with their 
customers to resolve issues. As such, LD 1167 is unnecessary. For these reasons, CTlA 
respectfully requests an Ought Not to Pass report on the bill. 
Sincerely, 
Gerard Keegan 
Vice President 
State Legislative Affairs 
5 Spectrum Ne., LLC v. Frey, 22 F.4th 287, 302 (lst Cir. 2022).
