Written Testimony of Charter Communications, Inc.  
before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
on 
LD 1167  An Act to Require Communications Service Providers to Prorate Customer Bills for 
Cancellation and Allow a Reduction in Service for a Customer with an Outstanding Balance  
 
 
April 4, 2023  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony in opposition to LD 1167 .   
Charter Communications serv es 466,000  customers in 29 5 Maine communities  across the 
state.  We employ over 750 Maine residents and just recently announced an $82 million dollar 
investment which will build on an already established and robust network  across the state . 
 Charter has long faced video competition in Maine and the last few years have seen the 
emergence of  many  new online competitors, includ ing providers that offer a full suite of cable and 
broadcast programming services as well as on -demand offeri ngs.  To the extent that this bill does 
not intend to apply the same proration standard to direct competitors  like Netflix and Hulu , we 
respectfully oppose it. Putting one video competitor , cable companies,  at an unfair disadvantage 
in the marketplace compared to their  online streaming services  competitors  is not only bad for 
competition, it is bad for Mainers .   
The portion of LD 1167 that applies to broadband internet service is preempted  by federal 
law.  Multiple courts and the FCC have concluded that a requirement to prorate bills is a form of 
rate regulation.  States are barred by federal law to regulate the prices of broadband inte rnet service . 
Charter’s Whole -Month Billing Policy  For Broadband Internet Service  
Charter has long sold broadband Internet  service to customers on a monthly basis, charging 
for service at the beginning of each monthly billing period.  Under this “whole -month” billing 
policy, those customers that cancel may continue to receive service until the end of the month, but 
are not cha rged for the next billing period.  Charter’s Terms of Service clearly spell out this policy, 
 
2 
 providing clear notice that if a customer cancels service mid -month, that customer receives the full 
month of internet or mob ile service already paid for:  aside f rom the introductory promotional 
period, a “[s]ubscriber shall be responsible for the full monthly charge (without pro -ration) for 
those Services that are offered on a monthly subscription basis to which the Subscriber has 
subscribed.”1  Similar language is included on each monthly service bill.  
Maine’s Lack of Proration Parity in the Law  
In 2020 , Maine passed a law , later upheld by the First Circuit , requiring cable operators 
like Charter , but no other video service providers, to prorate customer bills. Since that time, when 
a customer asks to cancel video service mid -month, Charter  stops their service and provides a pro 
rata refund for the remainder of the month.  
Charter competes in a crowded video -content marketplace that includes traditional cable 
service providers, satellite video providers, and as well online streaming services . The streaming 
services now account for more video viewership than traditional cable video2 but Maine’s law only 
applies to cable video .  Most of these streaming video companies  apply “whole -month” billing 
with no proration .  Customers are billed for service in advance; if a customer cancels service mid -
month, the custom er receives the full month of service already paid for and  is then not billed for 
the next month .   
If the legislature believes that consumers should not be responsible to pay the full monthly 
subscription after termination of service , it should ensure tha t the law treats video competitors 
alike .  A consumer that subscribes to Charter video and cancels mid -month is required by law to 
receive a pro -rated refund. A consumer that subscribes to Charter’s streaming video competitors 
 
1 See https://www.spectrum.com/content/spectrum/residential/en/policies/ residential -terms.html  
2 https://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/streaming -viewership -overtakes -cable -tv-first-time -rcna43704   
 
3 
 and cancels mid -month is charged for the whole month and the law does not require them to receive 
a refund. If it was important enough to the legislature to ensure pro rata refunds for some  Maine 
video subscribers,  it is surely important enough to ensure pro rata refunds for all. 
Further, if the legislature wants to extend this requirement beyond video, there are 
countless other products and services for which Maine consumers are sold either full monthly or 
annual subsc riptions, where such terms do not entitle the customer to receive a refund or credit 
upon termination of service.  Health club memberships, social club dues, even transportation 
services like monthly train or ferry passes are all examples of services sold on a monthly basis, 
where customers are not entitled to refunds after termination of service.  Lastly, even newspaper 
subscriptions  for Maine ’s largest newspapers do not prorate or offer refunds  to a customer that is 
billed monthly  when they cancel their subscription  in the middle of the billing cycle.   
 
LD 1167  is Unlawful Rate Regulation and Therefore Preempted  
 
Separately, LD 1167 seeks to impose the pro rata refund requirement on an entirely new 
category of services, broadband internet services. Doing so would be considered common carrier 
regulation and preempted by the FCC.  In 2019, the  D.C. Circuit in Mozilla v. FCC  upheld the 
FCC’s classification of broadband service as a Title I information service , rather than as a Title II 
common carrier service .3 Though the Mozilla  court held that the FCC could not expressly preempt 
all state broadband regulation in advance, it specifically stated that “[i]f the [FCC] can explain 
how a state practice actually undermines the [2018 Restoring Internet Freedom Order], then it can 
invoke  conflict preemption.”  There is no clearer form of common carrier regulation than r ate 
regulation , and thus rate regulation  of broadband service through a proration requirement would 
 
3 Mozilla v. FCC , 940 F.3d 1 (2019)  
 
4 
 directly conflict with the FCC’s Title I  classification of broadband, as well as its findings that 
“[u]tility -style regulation is particularly inapt for a dynamic industry built on technological 
development and disruption” and would “run contrary to the public interest.”4  
Conclusion  
LD 1167 would , if it exclud es streaming video providers  from a law that applies to other 
competing video providers , leave a n anti-competitive law in place to the detriment of Maine 
consumers .  Furthermore, the law would seek to impose proration on  services that it is preempted 
from do ing so under federal law.  Accordingly, Charter  is opposed to this piece of legislation .  
 
4 Restoring Internet Fr eedom , FCC 17 -166, Order (2018)  
