 
 
 Mailing Address: 
 P.O. Box 1280 - Westbrook, ME 04098 
 Street Address: 
 15 Saunders Way, Suite 500-G, Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Telephone 207-523-5170 (V/TTY) – Fax 207-289-7029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD 659: An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the 
Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 28, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  
 
My name is Ann-Marie Mayberry.  I am the executive director for GMS.   
For over four decades, GMS has been designing and maintaining programs that enhance, 
support, and teach through knowledge, respect, and dignity. GMS provides Shared Living, In-
Home Support, Case Management, and Residential Services.  We are dedicated to serving the 
community by providing a valuable service while working collaboratively with individuals 
served, guardians, family members, agencies, caseworkers, and other advocates. The 
individuals we serve live, work, volunteer and socialize in their community with support from 
dedicated professionals.   
I applaud the Department for reimagining services and supports for people with disabilities and 
for creating additional options under the proposed Lifespan Program.  
 
We especially appreciate the coordination between OADS and OCFS and the consideration that 
is being given to streamline entry into the adult system and to eliminate the longstanding “cliff” 
and waiting period that young adults with disabilities and their families face when aging out of 
the children’s services system in hopes of accessing services in the adult system. 
 
As promising as the new waiver is, the prospect of launching a new system in less than two 
years from now is daunting. As a longstanding provider of Section 21 and 29 waiver services, I 
am unsure how best to prepare the people I support and my staff for what is to come in 2025.  
 
This is a significant redesign of the system which will impact all stakeholders. In order to ensure 
access to the services as intended we strongly encourage that rules related to the creation of 
services under the Lifespan Waiver be major substantive.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Ann-Marie Mayberry 
ammayberry@gmsme.org  
 
