To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  
From: Brett Bulmer - Director of Programs, Independence Association, Brunswick, ME  
Subject: LD 659 An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports 
Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism  
Date: March 29, 2023 
 
My name is Brett Bulmer. I am the Director of Programs at Independence Association in 
Brunswick. For the last 25 years, I have supported individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities. I am submitting written testimony regarding LD 659 “An Act to 
Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for 
Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism”. 
 
I am testifying neither for nor against LD 659. I am generally supportive of the concept but 
believe taking a position is premature at this stage. 
 
I do have one major concern about the “Lifespan Waiver”. At present, the LD recommends that 
the department adopt this bill as routine technical. I urge you and the HHS Committee to 
reconsider this recommendation and make it a major substantive. This waiver would replace 
Sections 20, 21 and 29 of the MaineCare Benefits Manual, making it the single most expensive 
portion of the Home and Community Based Waiver system in our state. Additionally, its impact 
on service delivery would be significant, impacting literally thousands of clients, families, 
providers, and other stakeholders for many years to come. It has the potential of literally 
transforming our model of care. This legislation is major by every objective standard and 
deserves the full scrutiny and discussion of a major substantive change. 
 
Thank you for considering my testimony. 
 
Brett Bulmer 
Gardiner, Maine 
 
 
Brett Bulmer
Gardiner
LD 659
To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
From: Brett Bulmer - Director of Programs, Independence Association, Brunswick, 
ME 
Subject: LD 659 An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community 
Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities or Autism 
Date: March 29, 2023
My name is Brett Bulmer. I am the Director of Programs at Independence Association
in Brunswick. For the last 25 years, I have supported individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities. I am submitting written testimony regarding LD 659 “An 
Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the 
Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism”.
I am testifying neither for nor against LD 659. I am generally supportive of the 
concept but believe taking a position is premature at this stage.
I do have one major concern about the “Lifespan Waiver”. At present, the LD 
recommends that the department adopt this bill as routine technical. I urge you and 
the HHS Committee to reconsider this recommendation and make it a major 
substantive. This waiver would replace Sections 20, 21 and 29 of the MaineCare 
Benefits Manual, making it the single most expensive portion of the Home and 
Community Based Waiver system in our state. Additionally, its impact on service 
delivery would be significant, impacting literally thousands of clients, families, 
providers, and other stakeholders for many years to come. It has the potential of 
literally transforming our model of care. This legislation is major by every objective 
standard and deserves the full scrutiny and discussion of a major substantive change.
Thank you for considering my testimony.
Brett Bulmer
Gardiner, Maine

