 
Senator Baldacci 
Representative Meyer 
Members of the Committee of Health and Human Services 
 
RE: LD 464 An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community-based Services for People with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability, Brain Injury or Other Related Conditions and 
LD 659 An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for 
Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism. 
 
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee. My 
name is Carrie Woodcock I am the parent of two children with special needs and the Executive Director 
for Maine Parent Federation (MPF), the federally funded Parent Training and Information Center (PTI), 
Family to Family Health Information Center (F2F) and Statewide Family Network. We assist families of 
children with disabilities and special healthcare needs to navigate all systems of care. I am submitting 
this testimony neither for nor against LD 464 An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community-based 
Services for People with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability, Brain Injury or Other Related 
Conditions and LD 659 An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across 
the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism. 
 
Maine Parent Federation fully supports eliminating all waitlists for individuals with disabilities and 
special health care needs as well as seamless and flexible supports across the lifespan. One concern we 
have is eliminating waitlists does not prevent against them returning in the future. I believe back in July 
of 2016 we eliminated Section 29 waitlists. While the waitlist was cleared it was not long before it was 
again created as the need far outweighed the supply. The Lifespan waiver programming is a start but as 
was presented at the public hearing there are a lot of missing details that still need to be answered, 
including decentralization.  
 
It is of the utmost importance that Maine does the work to create a system that provides the right 
services at the right time for each person. This work is not just contained to adult services but also 
services received Birth through the age of 18 – something I like to refer to as the real Early Intervention. 
Our transition planning across all systems of care needs to greatly improve. We need to include these 
individuals into school and community life with their typically developing peers. We need to stop the 
placement of students in self-contained classrooms. We need increased opportunities for post-
secondary academic college experiences, which currently do not exist in our state.  
 
In short we need our schools, Vocational Rehabilitation Services, Office of Children and Family Services, 
Office of Aging and Disability Services, and University and Private College systems to work together to 
create a comprehensive transition plan. This plan should be individualized and should include 

employment, voluntary work, adult services, adult education, college, and independent living. One 
system should not shoulder the responsibility. We need to leverage all systems to meet the need. Some 
of this work was done under LD 924 out of the Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee and is 
currently being considered for legislative action. 
 
I will conclude with sharing a conversation I recently had with my 15-year-old daughter with Down 
Syndrome. As she entered her freshman year in High School, she shared with me her expectations. She 
was going to do her freshman, sophomore, and senior year (I reminded her about junior year 㡶㡷㡸) and 
graduate with her friends. She is then going to go to college and with her friends. She wants to graduate 
from college and become a police officer and live in an apartment with her friends. If I was presenting 
this idea to you about a typically developing 15-year-old you would have no hesitation about their ability 
to reach those goals. Because I told you Sami has Down Syndrome, I challenge you to be honest with 
yourself about what you thought about Sami’s ability to reach these goals. With the right supports, 
accommodations, modifications, and preparation Sami can come pretty darn close to realizing her 
aspirations just like her peers.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Carrie Woodcock 
Executive Director 
Maine Parent Federation 
cwoodcock@mpf.org  
(207) 588-1933 
 
