aim Community Housing of Maine 
Board Members 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director, Cumberland County 
Board President 
Chip Newell 
Principal, The NewHeight Group 
Board Treasurer 
Gunnar Hubbard 
Principal, Thornton Tomaselti 
Board Secretary 
David Birkhahn 
Vice President, TD Bank 
Elizabeth Boeppie 
Partner, Murray, Plumb, & Murray 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing 
investment Executive 
Luc Nya 
Mental Health Program Coordinator 
OCFSlCorrections Liaison, Maine DHHS 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident 
Thomas Ptacek 
Huston Commons Caseworker, 
Preble Street 
Jennifer Putnam 
Executive Director, Waypoint 
Jennifer Rottmann 
Deputy DirectorlCFO, The Genesis Fund 
John Ryan 
President, Wright-Ryan Construction 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President, Evernorth 
Kimberly Twitchetl 
Maine Regional President, NBT Bank 
Staff Contacts 
Cullen Ryan 
Executive Director 
Kyra Walker 
Chief Operating Ofﬁcer 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager 
Mara O‘Shea 
Compliance Manager 
Meredith Smith 
Supportive Housing Manager 
Chris Harmon 
Controller 
Jenny Jlmlno 
Bookkeeper 
Vlckey Merrill 
Advocacy Director 
Bree LaCasse 
Development Director 
Brian Kilgallen 
Development Oﬁicer 
Robyn Wardell 
Development Ofﬁcer March 20, 2023 
Re: LD 659, An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports 
Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or 
Autism. 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing 
of Maine or CHOM. I am also the parent of a 26-year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD). I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality 
Services, a coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on 
housing and quality services for people with ID/DD. I also serve as chair the Maine 
Developmental Services Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB). 
I am testifying neither for nor against LD 659, An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible 
Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities or Autism 
If LD 659 were as simple as creating a lifespan waiver, making it be the case that a person is 
served from early childhood to the end of their life with continuity of care through the existing 
array of services, there is no question that I would be in strong support. But as I am watching 
this design roll out, it is growing apparent that it is not so simple. There are many proposed 
changes rolled into this one initiative. 
One of the root strategies unveiled this week involves decentralizing services and moving to 
what is being called a hub and spoke model. Hub and spoke models have their place, but in 
this incarnation, it appears to be a recipe for dismantling what has been proven effective in 
favor of a replacement model that appears to be very labor intensive and potentially isolating 
to consumers. 
Whereas now, my son has been able to participate with a consistent group of peers ina 
community-based day program that involves independent skill building, socialization skill 
building, activities for enhanced skill building, and community involvement and engagement, 
the new model appears likely to shutter that in favor of someone coming to pick my son up and 
taking him into the “community ” by himself. I am ﬁlled with questions and concerns. 
My son would love to be employed but so far has had no luck securing paid employment. 
Although his thought processes are akin to that of a 4-year-old, he is energetic, enthusiastic, 
and widely loved. But he has not been able to turn that into something sellable to a paying 
employer. He has, however, been a very successful volunteer. This new waiver puts even 
more focus on employment and again, my son (and many others like him) would be left out of 
that equation. 
What my son lives for — is his day program - a place where he is surrounded by peers. He 
learns a broad array of skills, feels connected, and has fun with actual friends. It is the 
centerpiece of his life. Eliminating centralized services, which is exactly what my son 
participates in, would be devastating to him. Insisting instead he be led into the community by 
a support staff mostly exclusively, is akin to replacing actual relationships with peers — with 
something more like a paid escort service. The relationship is simply not the same. 
One City Center, 4"‘ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org
J7/X 
When I think of my son and where he is developmentally, I’m reminded that no kid (or adult) is thrilled about 
chaperones; they want to be free as much a possible with their friends. We need to celebrate group learning. I have 
concerns we may move away from peer-based models to something more isolative. I would expect centralized 
services would disappear much like group homes which are disappearing due to lack of stafﬁng, referrals, and staff pay 
rates that no longer work. Once group homes are gone, they are not going to be replaced; once centralized services are 
gone, these won’t be replaced either. Years of expertise and best practices will be lost. 
There are good ideas here, but the devil is in the details. This must be looked at very carefully. Please ensure this is 
major substantive so that all concerns can be addressed, and unintended consequences can be avoided. We can’t afford 
to jump into something that could upend our continuum of care on a hope it will be better. Yes, let’s create a lifespan 
waiver. But let’s not create a win-lose proposition or throw out the old for the new. Let’s take the time to get this 
right and celebrate what works and preserve that at the same time. My son’s and thousands of other lives are worth the 
extra care to get this right. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
One City Center, 4"‘ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 ~ 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org
