Debbie Dionne
Topsham
LD 659
March 20, 2023
To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.
RE: LD 659: An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community 
Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities or Autism
My name is Debbie Dionne and I  am the mother of a 43 year old woman living with 
a diagnosis of cerebral palsy, and an intellectual disability. My daughter’s  complex 
support needs continue to increase as she ages.  For the past 22 years she has lived in 
a licensed group home with 5 lifelong friends.   The Section 21 Waiver has provided 
those with higher, more complex needs, like my daughter, the supports and oversights
needed to allow them to safely live an independent, purposeful life with friends in 
their  community.  
To date, 75 group homes have closed with an additional 20 more homes to close in 
the next six months.  There is no shared data from DHHS as to where these displaced 
Mainers with ID/DD have moved to.  These group homes have closed because the 
group home rate does not support the program’s cost and the competitive wage 
needed to maintain the service. And there are over 2000 adults languishing on the 
wait list for section 21 services, many who have high support needs and live with 
elderly parents. 
In theory, the Lifespan Waiver appears to be a seamless, flexible solution to the 
existing waivers Maine currently operates under.  As they say, it is all about the 
timing and the details.  The Lifespan Waiver will eventually become  the sole  
funding source and all other waivers will become obsolete.   The rate study for section
21 is not due to take place until 2025, one year after the Lifespan Waiver is scheduled
to begin to be phased in. It feels as though this delay is deliberate and will cause the 
eventual death of all group homes and their service providers through attrition. I have 
never been so fearful for the future for all Mainers with ID/DD and higher support 
needs, like my daughter. She is counting on me to make sure her home and her 
independent life is not taken away from her.  
There is nothing routine technical about the enormous changes and funding mechanisms 
proposed to take place with the Lifespan Waiver.  In order to prevent the collapse of services 
for the ID/DD population with the highest needs this bill demands to be amended from routine
technical to major substantive. 

