4, 
sf, HoUsE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
*;t“- AUGUSTA MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Ed Crockett TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
128 Bramblewood Drive 
Portland, ME 04103 
Residence: (207) 797-8371 
Ed.Crockett@legislature.nraine.gov 
March 20, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Ed Crockett Introducing 
LD 659, An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community 
Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities or Autism 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed colleagues on the Health and Human Services 
Committee: I’m Ed Crockett and I represent House District 112, which includes part of Portland and 
part of Falmouth. I am here today to introduce LD 659, An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible 
Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities or Autism. More precisely, this bill outlines the work the Department of 
Health and Human Services will do to implement a “Lifespan waiver” to improve access to needed 
services for our friends and family with intellectual and developmental disabilities or Autism. 
I understand that you’ve heard a lot about the Lifespan waiver in this Committee, and I’ll leave the 
detailed description of this work to the Department of Health and Human Services who will testify 
after me. What I hope to reiterate and convey is this: whether through constituents, family, friends or 
neighbors, we’ve all heard about how the system of supports for people with IDD and Autism needs 
improvement. We’ve heard that it can be too rigid, that waitlists create anxiety and limit access to 
services, and that it doesn’t recognize the individual needs that each of our loved ones have. 
I want to thank the department for asking me to sponsor this bill. I’d also like to thank Reps. Meyer, 
Madigan, and Zager for directing me to the department last winter when my severely autistic nephew 
Riley, now 30, experienced multiple trips to the ER. His experience at Maine Med opened my eyes to 
the lack of services available to this community. I learned that individuals Whose primary diagnosis is 
autism are stuck, because there isn’t any temporary or permanent shelter available to them past the age 
of 21. Fortunately Riley has parents that are present and amazing caregivers. So Riley will have safe 
shelter as long as my brother and sister-in-law Who are both educators and soon to hit their seventies 
remain healthy and able to care for him. That got me thinking about what happens to young people 
(over 21) that don’t have anyone to care for them? Which someday could be my nephew. The answer 
sadly is, that without access to the right services these disadvantaged individuals can end up homeless 
and on the street. I ﬁnd that unconscionable and we must be better. That’s why, when the 
Department asked, I was ecstatic to sponsor this bill. 
District ll2: Portland (Part), Falmouth (Part)
Lifespan waiver services, when implemented, will start younger, as early as age 14, be more ﬂexible 
and responsive to individual needs, and make sure that Maine is on a path to the best system of 
services and supports that we can provide for this population. You should also know what this bill will 
not do: it will not force anyone currently receiving Sections 21 or 29 to give up or lose those services. 
While Lifespan, like any one policy, is no panacea to all our challenges, it will offer a better, simpler, 
more personalized and innovative structure for this population. 
Engagement with impacted people: clients, their families and support systems, providers, and other 
stakeholders — is absolutely critical. This bill will require that the Department convene a Lifespan 
Stakeholder Advisory Group and that it remain a venue for this work all the way through the two 
phases of implementation. 
l’m very excited that there is not a ﬁscal note on this bill. This Committee already unanimously 
approved the budget initiative associated with the Lifespan waiver, so this bill laying out the 
framework will not require a ﬁscal note. Now if it did, I’d still be asking, but this is better. So, thank 
you for that. 
This work is so crucial and inﬁnitely important, and Pm proud that the Department is willing to take 
the necessary steps to ensure public and Legislative engagement and feedback into this process as it is 
being developed. Thank you for your support of this work, and I hope you will pass this bill on behalf 
of the folks who will beneﬁt from a Lifespan waiver in Maine. 
Happy to take any questions. 
District ll2: Portland (Part), Falmouth (Part)
