 
 
 
 
 
              
              
 
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324 -7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org    
 
Written Testimony In Re: LD 659,  An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and 
Community  Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and  Developmental 
Disabilities or Autism  
 April 10, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee , 
 
I am writing neither for nor against LD 659 , since it is currently too early to assess t he services, 
scope, budget and functions that will be put forth in such a broad and far -reaching  effort to 
shift service delivery for people currently receiving  or eligible to receive MaineCare Section s 
21 and Sec tion 29.  
 
My name is Jennifer Putnam, Executive Director  at Waypoint ( formerly Waban ).  Waypoint has 
been delivering services to children and adults  with disabilities for over five decades.   From 
special purpose preschool services to aging in place for our oldest adult members, we provide 
a wide range of caring and supportive services in Southern Maine.  We also provide children ’s 
and adult case management through T argeted Case Management (TCM) MaineCare Section 
13, as well as Children ’s Care Coordi nation as part of Mai neCare Section 92, Behavioral Health  
Home. We have a  sign ificant  depth of understanding about services for children and adults 
with a variety of intellectual, developmental, behavioral health and autism diagnoses  after 
having provided services for so long to individuals and families in Maine.  
 
I have t he honor of sitting on the Maine Developmental Services Oversight and Advisory Board, 
the State ’s Mortality Review Panel (for deaths  and serious injuries to peopl e receiving  HCBS 
services) a nd the Board  of Directors for M aine Ass ociation for Community Ser vice Providers 
(MACSP). Most pertinent currently, I am a member of the Lifespan  Waiver Stakehold er 
Committee, comprised of parents, self -advoc ates, OADS and other state representa tives, and 
interested community partners.  Maine is clearly trying to address longstanding needs for 
better transition s, streamlined services and better access to services  for children and a dults 
with intellect ual and developmental disabilities.  
 My comments tod ay are not centered on the content of the  proposed n ew waiver or its  possible 
services , because  at th is point in the waiver ’s development, it is too soon to weigh in on most 
of it. What I would like  to focus on, though, is the significance  of this waiver as a re -design for 
all the services children  and adults  currently rely on to get their health, safety, functional, 
spiritual, and other needs met. As a state and as a group of caring and concerned  people, we 
cannot afford to get this wrong. We have one opportunity to bring forward a vision of care and 
support ive services that will meet the needs of everyone across the continuum not only of the  
lifespan, but across  the vast differences in levels of need for services. B ecause  of this, it is critical 
that we treat th e Life span Waiver proposal with the understanding  of the deep and lasting 
impact the  new Waiver will have on people with intellectual disabilities in Maine, and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
              
 
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324 -7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org    
 
acknowled ge that this is clearly a major, substantive piece of legislation and should be treated 
as such . There is much at stake, not only in the impact of the new waiver, but  also the impact 
of ending of the current two waivers , Section 21 and 29 , which have served the needs of the 
most vulnerable for many years.  
 There are a multitude of una nswered questions at such an early stage in th e process of re -
imagining s ervices for thousands of vulnerable people. We owe it to them to ensure we 
approach  it thoughtfully  and care fully. Please vote to make this  bill major substantive .  
  
Thank you for reading this testimony and I am available to clarify my testimony or answer any 
questions.  
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
JPutnam @waypointmaine.org  

