Chairman Baldacci, Chairwoman Myers, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services,
My name is Kathy Rickards and I am the parent of a 42 year old man with medical, intellectual, and 
mental health diagnoses that significantly impact his life. In Section 1 of LD 659, it states that the 
Department of Health and Human Services shall adopt routine technical rules pursuant to the Maine 
Revised Statutes, Title 5, Chapter 375, Subchapter 2-A establishing a Maine Care Home and Community 
based Lifespan program for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities, autism, or other 
related conditions, referred to in the Act as “the lifespan program.” My purpose in testifying is to ask 
that the designation “routine technical” be amended to “major substantive” because simply put, it is a 
huge departure from all previous Waiver Services and may have life altering effects for people with 
more severe disabilities.
The Lifespan Waiver is purported to be a flexible, seamless, and fair allocation of services. I appreciate 
that the Department of Health and Human Services has begun this major rules change well ahead of 
implementation, and that a stakeholder advisory committee was initiated, however I am in hopes that 
this committee will work to be more responsive to individuals served and their families, as I understand 
this is not the case currently.
Maine has long been a leader in person centered planning for adults with disabilities. Planning for 
services was done by invested stakeholders who knew the individual and the services that would be 
required to support quality of life in their chosen communities. The Lifespan Waiver negates all the 
knowledge and care of a person’s team, and instead, relies on a one-time assessment by an unknown 
evaluator. This will never capture the needs of people with intellectual, communication and/or 
behavioral challenges. This one-time assessment will assign each person a funding level tied to a budget. 
The ramifications of this one-time assessment became clear when this disastrous policy of using the SIS 
(Supports Intensity Scale) was begun in 2015, and then discontinued due to the harm done to the 
disability community. I have seen no research that the implementation of the SIS has led to improved 
quality of life for people with disabilities. In fact, I believe the majority of individuals lost significant 
funding and services. In no other segment of the population is a one-time test done to determine every 
aspect of their lives.
Section 21 has long been the funding mechanism for housing and community services. It is my 
understanding that Section 21 will die from attrition as the Lifespan Waiver is put into effect, so this very 
stable foundation of people’s lives will be gone. This is in no way “routine technical” for people with 
disabilities, their families, and the agencies that support them.  Please amend the language of this bill to 
major substantive in the interest of meeting the needs of individuals with disabilities who have seen the 
collapse of care for many in their community.
