 Speaking Up For Us                  PO Box 4139 •Presque Isle • Maine 04769               (207) 956-1004 
March 19, 2023
Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Senate Chair
Rep. Michele Meyer, House Chair
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony For LD 659 "An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community 
Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities or Autism "
Senator Baldacci, Representative Myer, and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, 
My name is Kile Pelletier, and I live in Fort Kent, ME, and I am a person with a disability as well 
as the spouse of a person with a disability. I work for Speaking Up For Us, Maine’s Self-
Advocacy Network. 
I am a proud person with a disability here to testify on behalf of other people that have 
disabilities. I'm here to support LD 659. I feel the Lifespan Waiver will help people have a broad 
idea of the types of things that they want to do in their lives, for example if people wanted to 
decide to self-direct their services the lifespan would add that help to these people with 
disabilities to actually achieve their goals of self-direction.
The Lifespan Waiver will help people broaden their vision of different types of services that can 
better their life and be part of their community. If a person getting services wants to go to a 
baseball game, a concert, certain stores, or to hang out with their friends in the community they 
should be able to get the support they need to do so. The Lifespan Waiver should help people to 
get better transition services and to have more flexibility in how their services are delivered 
without being told by their agency there is no money, or they can’t do something. 
In closing I would like to say,  I'm a person with a disability who wants to see other people who 
have a disability like myself succeed and get more flexibility in their services. I would love to 
see this committee pass LD 659 so people with disabilities to actually get flexible choices in their 
lives and have their needs met. 
Thank you to this committee for working on LD 659.
Sincerely,
Kile Pelletier
Fort Kent
kpelletier@sufumaine.org 
 Speaking Up For Us                  PO Box 4139 •Presque Isle • Maine 04769               (207) 956-1004
