1 
  
Supportin g LD 659: An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community 
Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals  with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities or Autism  
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Distinguished members of the H ealth 
and Human Services  Committe e 
I have l ived in Belfast Maine for over ten years  and am testifying today in support of     
LD 65 9. Among the goals of this proposed Lifesp an waiver  is the creat ion of  a,  
“Seamless  transition between children ’s services and adult services. ”  
As the mother , sole surviving parent , and guardian  of a 24-year -old with  the diagnosis of 
autism , I truly wish that this lifespan waiver had been an option  for my son  during his 
high school years .  
When my son had to move from children’s  services to adu lt services,  this was not a 
smooth transi tion because  in the process my son lost the man who had been hi s 
Behavioral He alth Professional (BHP ) consistently  for four years  while he was in middle 
and high school. Since my son when he was twelve  had lost his father at 50 to Lou 
Gehrig’s dise ase, this BHP played a critical role in his life. My son a s a person with 
limited communication and social skills had s pent most of his life trapped in his own 
world . Initially  he fou nd it  very difficult to be with his BHP,  but he did adapt  and showed 
signs of g rowth in m any areas including  tolerance for new people and ne w sit uations . 
He also started to learn  many critical life-skills including  how to be safe in parking lots, 
how to use public restrooms , how to relate socially , how to shop and pay for items, etc. 
Given that my son has mul tiple sensory issues which trigger behaviors including bolting , 
the role of his B HP was not an easy one , yet they were together  successfully  for four 
years until my son had to drop children’s  services.   
For a person  like my son  who is very a verse to change , consistency is cr itically 
important,  he deeply  sensed the loss of his BHP . In adult services in almost four years,  
he has not had  a replacement to take him into the co mmunity . This issue w as further 
compounded  when my son aged out of high school  and was home full time with me. He 
fell off the prov erbial cliff and suddenly  foun d himself without any place to go on a daily 
basis, he lost friends and the positive input he had be en receiving  from teachers , 
educational techs , etc.  As a result , he regressed severely and many of his old 
2 
 “behaviors ” reemerged. As a mothe r it is hear tbreaking to watch my son  lose previ ously 
hard -gained skills  and instead t o see him often lost in isolation  and prof ound sadness.   
Throug h telling th e story of my son , I hope that you will all see how important it is for 
the transition  from children’s  to adult service s to be as s eamless as possible. Situations 
like what happened with my son can be avert ed, and much heartac he can be spared.  
I urge you to please support LD 659. By doing so you can help achi eve the stated goal :  
“Early  planning for independence  with emp hasis on  independent  living skills and 
employment services for youth to prepare them for as much independence as 
possible in adulthood .”  
My hope is that DOE , OADS , and DOL/ VR, will collaborate  during high school  towards 
achieving this laudable goal.        
Thank you for your time,  
Respectfully  
Linda Lee ,  
Belfast, Maine . 
