Maine Developmental Disabilities Council 
17 March 2023 
Testimony in support of LD 659, An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports 
Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services: 
My name is Rachel Dyer, and I am the associate director ofthe Maine Developmental Disabilities Council. 
Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance 
and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970. Maine's DD Council has been advocating for individuals with 
developmental disabilities for over 50 years. The DD Council is a federally funded, independent 
organization with members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and 
representatives of public and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for sen/ices for 
individuals with developmental disabilities. As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, 
capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and 
other disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated, and involved in their communities and the 
decisions impacting their lives. 
Conceptually, the “Lifespan waiver" makes a lot of sense. It proposes to offer a wide variety of and flexibility 
in services. lt proposes to address some of the shortcomings ofthe current sen/ice delivery system, 
especially those around the transition into adulthood and potentially those experienced later in adulthood 
and the lack of a needs assessment that determines the level services one is eligible for. lt provides an 
opportunity to promote service outcomes (quality) rather than delivery (quantity) and to address 
longstanding disparities in access to services. 
There are a potential problems with the change to a lifespan waiver, including but not limited to OADS’s 
capacity to effectively administer a new, hugely complicated menu of services, user understanding of and 
trust in changes to the current system. 
Thus far, MDDC has been impressed with OADS’s approach to developing this service, including its 
engagement of stakeholders. Should this be approved, perhaps the HHS Committee would consider 
requesting an update next year on the project and process from the involved members of the DD 
community. 
Thank you for this oppoitunity to testify. 
139 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04330 207-480 1478 www.maineddc.org
