 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
March 2 7, 2023  
 
Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 Re:  LD 659, An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports 
Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism  
 Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Standing Members of the Committee On Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Staci Converse and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine 
(DRM).  DRM is Maine’s designated Protection and Advocacy Agency and our mission is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expand ing 
opportunities for people with disabilities in Maine.  We write in strong support of LD 659, “An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 
or Aut ism.”  
 
The modernization of the service delivery system called for in the Lifespan Waiver is 
long overdue , and it will have a significant positive impact on the lives of the people 
we serve. As a society, we have an obligation to supp ort and empower all individuals, 
including those with developmental disabilities, to lead independent and fulfilling lives,  and the changes proposed in this bill reflect these values.  
  
2 
 The current system is outdated and broken, and too often, adults with developmental 
disability labels are invisible. Right now, many people with developmental disabilities 
are segregated into group homes and community support programs where they live highly controlled lives and have little meaningful interaction with people outside these 
institutions. Opportunities for employment are both rarely encouraged and extremely limited.  
 That is why Maine needs the Lifespan Waiver. This waiver focuses on independence and lays out a vision for how to support people to get jobs. The Lifespan Waiver 
would also expand the availability of self -directed services for people. Self- directed 
services provide individuals with developmental disabilities greater control over their lives, allowing them to make decisions about how they wa nt to live, work, and pursue 
their goals. This approach empowers individuals to live more independently and with 
dignity, which is essential for their well -being. Self -directed services would also help 
alleviate some of the staffing issues that have long -plagued providers delivering 
services in congregate settings.  
 OADS has already convened a stakeholder group to develop  the Lifespan Waiver , and 
it is currently meeting to brainstorm ideas about what services should be included in the waiver .  The group includes a diverse range of perspectives, including individuals 
who receive services, family members, advocates, DRM, OADS staff, and service 
providers. This broad range of opinions ensures that all voices are  representat ed and 
that the final policy recommendations are inclusive and reflective of the needs and wants of all stakeholders. Although the stakeholder group is currently in the 
brainstorming stage, I am impressed by the quality and quantity of ideas being 
discussed. The group is taking  a collaborative approach, sharing experiences, 
challenges, and solutions, and seeking common ground. This  approach is essential to 
creating effective and sustainable policy reform that can lead to positive outcomes for 
all stakeholders.  
 
Because the Lifespan Waiver  will improve the lives of individuals with developmental 
disabilities by providing them with greater choice, independence, and opportunities to lead fulfilling lives  we urge you to support this bill .  
  
3 
 Sincerely,  
 
  Staci Converse  
Managing Attorne y 

