 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Victoria Shaw, Assistant Director Case Management  
Anna Godin, LCSW, Supervisor of Adult Case Mana gement and Outpatient Clinician  
LD 659: An Act to Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for 
Individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
March 24, 2023  
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and estee med members of the Health and Human 
Services Committees.  
Our names are Victoria Shaw and Anna Godin. We work at Woodfords Family Services, a statewide nonprofit 
committed to the support and inclusion of people with intellectual and developmental disabilit ies, and their 
families. We provide Targeted Case Management services to adults with Intellectual Disabilities and/or Autism 
under MaineCare Section 13. Woodfords serves approximately 400 clients in this program.  
We are testifying neither for nor against LD 659. While we see opportunities for individuals with disabilities to 
benefit from the proposed legislation, we have significant concerns about the details of the proposal and its 
implications for the future of the service delivery system within which we  work. This is a complex proposal, and 
at a minimum, we ask the Committ ee to amend LD 659 to be Major  Substantive so that the legislature and the 
larger provider community have the full opportunity to understand and weigh the implications of any changes 
enacted.  
Woodfords understands the importance of a youth’s transition to adult services. For many years, providers and 
families have referenced “the cliff” between children’s and adult services, recognizing that families can 
experience a stark and significan t change in support as they transition to adulthood. For this reason, we support 
the legislation’s attempt to begin the transition process earlier, beginning at age 14.  Transition case managers 
assist families with eligibility for adult services, includin g guardianship, living arrangements, social security and 
finishing school requirements, including but not limited to Individual Education Plans. This service under 
MaineCare Section 13 is critical for youth and their families.  
We are concerned, however, that the proposed legislation is suggesting a complete new system that may 
eliminate MaineCare Section 13 as a service altogether, and cannot stress enough that the services Adult Case 
Managers provide currently is invaluable.  
Here are three areas of concern:  
1. Under Section 13, The Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS) recently implemented a new 
Person Centered Planning (PCP) process and has announced the implementation of a new software  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
system (Evergreen). The im mense cost to implement these new planning tools would be obsolete if the 
state transitions to the Lifespan Waiver model. The Lifespan model would have a Care Plan, not the 
current Person Centered Plan. Under Section 20, Care Coordinators create Care Plans  once per year, this 
could take away the client’s right to create a Person Centered Plan centered on their individual wishes 
and needs. Whereas, Section  13 Person Centered Plans stand alone as an independent service model 
that identifies the client’s indiv idual wishes and needs, without bias.    
 
2. DHHS has begun testing the new Supports Intensity Scale (SIS).  This assessment can be tied into the 
existing waivers and start the assessment at an earlier age to plan for the needs of clients needing 
services and  support.  At this  time, it is unclear how the  SIS will be used to determine client needs  and 
what the impact could be . We are concerned that it will lead to a decrease in clients’ voice. We have 
many clients who experienced the SIS assessments in the past , which cost the state over $3,000,000 for 
a system that was never implemented and these completed assessments were never used. Those 
clients, who experienced the assessment, are now expressing fear of having to go through the SIS 
assessment again.  
 
3. If DHH S moves to a care coordination service, modeled after Section 20 , we have significant concerns 
that we would not be able to provide this services.  The MaineCare Section 20 billing rate in Care 
Coordination is $7.50 less per quarter hour than what is paid for Section 13 services.  The Care 
Coordinator’s primary job is office based, separate from the client and focused on the required process 
and forms. Clients need face -to-face support, they need trusted providers who offer consistency and 
help to the clien ts so that they understand how to get the help they require and make the right 
decisions for themselves. We have experienced an increase in clients with a higher risk of police 
involvement, homelessness and exploitation.  Maine needs to support clients and  their families with 
services that provide support in all domains of life. Section 13 Case Management supports clients and 
their families to have inclusion  in their own communities.  T his invaluable service should not be put at 
risk.  By eliminati ng this  service more clients and citizens will be at risk of being in jeopardy.  
Please consider the thoughts and experience of those who are delivering the Case Management services.  
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
Victoria Shaw , LSW  
Vshaw@woodfords.org   
Anna Godin , LCSW  
Agodin@woodfords.org   
 
