20 March 2023 
Mr. Chairman and esteemed committee members, 
My name is Aaron Rollins. I served two tours in Iraq with Bravo Company 3/172 INF (MTN) in 
2006 and 2007 where I was wounded while conducting combat operations. I am the Past Commander 
of the Madison American Legion Post 39 where we unanimously passed a resolution in support of 
this legislation in 2021. A copy of that Resolution is attached to my written testimony. I am happy to 
report that our American Legion National Commander Vincent "Jim" Troiola has followed 
our lead by saying: 
"Our nation's founders made clear that declaration of war is the solemn and sole 
responsibility of the U.S. Congress. The American Legion calls on Congress to once again 
follow the text of Article 1, Section 8, Clause 11, of the U.S. Constitution." 
I have been informed that General Famham recently reported that 10 Maine Guardsmen have been 
KIA in the Global War on Terror to date. On May 6th 2006 I was present when two of those ten paid 
the ultimate price in the service of our State and Nation. SSG David Veverka was my team leader and 
SSG Dale Kelley was our squad medic. I am honored to have known and served with them and 
mourn their loss every day. I hope you can all understand that this bill is therefore extremely personal 
to me. I have seen and personally paid the cost of war and would do so again without hesitation 
because our people and our nationions Constitution are absolutely worth it. The Maine National 
Guard and its members have and will always stand ready to deploy, engage and defeat any enemy of 
our State or Nation. We will never cower and you should not either. You will hear evil and false 
arguments today about funding being withdrawn and decreased reddiness tln"eats if you do the right 
thing. They are all lies. The US Constitution is clear, there is no ambiguity, only the US Congress has 
the authority to declare war and that same body has been derelict in its solemn duty for over 80 
years. Like every other Veteran of Foreign War I have put my life, health and safety on the line to 
defend our laws. Perhaps none of you were aware that the Constitution has been subverted so 
heinously for so long. You are now fully aware and with this knowledge you are now duty bound in 
the same way and under the same oath to interpose. I am not asking you to dodge bombs or bullets 
but simply to do your duty, keep your oath and defend the men and women of this State that have and 
will always defend you! 
Respectfully, 
SGT Aaron Rollins - MEARNG Retired Ii 
Et 
IE 
>>: 
.1 
It 
x 
ll 
;.
i 
x
a
5
. 
l li 
1?
Il
RESOLUTION 
POST NO. 39, THE AMERICAN LEGION IN REGULAR MEETING ASSEMBLED IN 
MADISON, MAINE ON FEBRUARY 1“ , 2021 
RESOLUTION NO. 2021.1 
SUBJECT: DEFEND THE GUARD ACT 
ORIGIN: LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEE POST NO. 39 
REFERRED TO: GENERAL MEMBERSHIP POST NO. 39 
WHEREAS, Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of the United States vest in the United States Congress the 
exclusive power of war; and 
WHEREAS, In spite of the clear language of the United States Constitution, vesting the power over war exclusively 
in the United States Congress, the United States Executive Branch has unconstitutionally assumed the power while 
the United States Congress has abdicated its constitutional duty; and 
WHEREAS, Although the United States Congress has not declared war in seventy-nine (79) years, this Nation has 
since gone to war repeatedly at the whim of the Executive Branch and; 
WHEREAS, When such unconstitutional actions are taken by the Federal Government, it is the proper role of the 
States themselves to take action to remedy such situations, as outlined in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions of 
1 798; and 
WHEREAS, The Father of our Republic, George Washington, once wrote “The Constitution vests the power of 
declaring war in Congress; therefore, no offensive expedition of importance can be undertaken until after they shall 
have deliberated upon the subject and authorized such measure”; and 
WHEREAS, The Father of the Constitution, James Madison, once wrote: “The Constitution supposes, what the 
History of all Governments demonstrates, that the Executive is the branch of power most interested in war; and most 
prone to it. It has accordingly with studied care vested the question of war to the Legislature ”; and 
WHEREAS, The author of the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson, once wrote: “We have already given 
in example one effectual check to the dog of war by transferring the power of letting him loose from the Executive to 
the Legislative body...” and “Considering that Congress alone is constitutionally invested with the power of changing 
our condition from peace to war, I have thought it my duty to await their authority for using force in any degree which 
could be avoided”; and 
WHEREAS, The Tenth (10"‘) Amendment of the United States Constitution states: “The powers not delegated to the 
United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the 
people” , giving the States or the people the power to nullify, or invalidate; and 
WHEREAS, The National Guard is under jurisdiction of States unless during time of Declared War, natural or man 
made disaster, therefore the consent of the Governor is necessary; now, therefore, be it 
RESOLVED, By Post No 39, The American Legion in Regular Meeting assembled in Madison, Maine on 
February 1“ , 2021, That The American Legion, Post No. 39, urges State Government to hereby fully support 
the “Defend The Guard Act”; and 
RESOLVED, That the Governor of Maine shall not mobilize Maine National Guard personnel to foreign 
service under Title 10 orders without an official Declaration of War from the United States Congress.
