- 
V, 
if 
_ »i' 
,j"i' 
.;_ ?*=;i‘ilei=' ;<i1, F/ii? ti 1 
i1 
J37?5 
,_ 
J, ; _, 
‘»mw1.zir:liimain» m 
AMERIGAN Blllll. UBERTIES UNION 
Mame TESTIMONY or MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass - LD 1054 
An Act to Prohibit the Maine National Guard from Combat 
Deployment Absent an Act of the United States Congress 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy 
Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On 
behalf of our members, I urge you to support LD 1054 because it would help prevent the erosion 
of civil liberties during an unconstitutional declaration of war. 
If enacted, this bill would prohibit the release of state military forces into active-duty 
combat in a foreign nation absent an official declaration of war or ofﬁcial action for an 
enumerated constitutional purpose passed by the United States Congress. It would also allow the 
Governor to deploy the state military forces for civil missions within the United States or the 
territories of the United States. 
' 
The decision to initiate war inevitably sanctions violations of civil liberties that are not 
permitted in peacetime. Historically, wars have fostered a domestic atmosphere hostile to civil 
liberties — especially First Amendment rights — that results in their infringement without 
constitutional justification or means for effective redress. 
No process for initiatingrwar can fully protect civil liberties from the threats posed by 
war. But, in recognition of the gravity of war, Aiticle ,1, Section 8 of the Constitution vests the 
power to initiate war exclusively in Congress -- the branch of the federal governmentsmost 
capable of providing the American people with a full and open debate before committing 
them to war. The President ’s Article 2 war powers, unlike Congress ’s power to declare war, are 
fundamentally defensive; they exist to enable a rapid response to an invasion, not to order an 
afﬁrmative attack or invasion. To assure that war’s threats to civil liberties are risked only after
1
the most responsible and accountable ofﬁcial deliberation, the constitutionally-placed authority 
of Congress to commit our nation to war must not be transgressed by the Executive Branch. 
This bill would ensure that Maine’s troops are never deployed in an unconstitutional war 
We urge you to vote ought to pass.
2
