What   is   the   Defend   the   Guard   Act?  
 
The   Constitution   vests   the   power   to   declare   war   exclusively   in   Congress.   Despite   this   clear  
language,   Congress   has   repeatedly   abdicated   its   duty   by   unconstitutionally   delegating   that  
authority   to   the   executive   branch.   At   other   times,   presidents   have   simply   assumed   that   power  
on   their   own.  
 
As   a   result,   although   Congress   has   not   declared   war   since   World   War   II,   presidents   have  
repeatedly   sent   American   troops   overseas   into   combat   anyway.  
 
The   Defend   the   Guard   Act   is   state-level   legislation   to   prohibit   the   overseas   deployment   of   a  
state’s   National   Guard   units   without   a   congressional   declaration   of   war.  
 
What   Is   the   Constitutional   Basis   for   Defend   the   Guard?  
 
Under   the   Constitution   in   Article   1   Sec.   8   Clause   11,   Congress   is   delegated   the   power   to  
declare   war.   The   power   to   wage   war   once   it   has   been   declared   is   delegated   to   the   president   as  
commander-in-chief   in   Article   2   Sec.   2.  
 
These   are   two   separate   and   distinct   roles.   Congress   makes   the   decision   to   enter   into   war.   The  
president   then   has   the   authority   to   prosecute   the   war,   within   the   limits   Congress   places   on   him.  
The   designation   of   commander   in   chief   does   not   delegate   to   the   president   power   to   take  
America   into   war   or   initiate   any   offensive   military   expeditions.   
 
Founding-era   discussion   on   war   powers   makes   it   clear   that   the   framers   and   ratifiers   wanted   the  
authority   to   take   America   into   war   placed   in   the   legislative   branch   because   it   was   the  
deliberative   body   most   closely   representing   the   will   of   the   people.   They   did   not   want   the  
authority   to   drag   the   U.S.   into   war   placed   at   the   discretion   of   one   individual.   Madison   makes   this  
clear   in    a   letter   to   Thomas   Jefferson .  
“The   constitution   supposes,   what   the   History   of   all   Governments   demonstrates,   that   the  
Executive   is   the   branch   of   power   most   interested   in   war,   &   most   prone   to   it.   It   has   accordingly  
with   studied   care,   vested   the   question   of   war   in   the   Legislature.”  
 
Madison   wrote   in   detail   about   war   powers   in   his    Letters   of   Helvidius .  
“ In   the   general   distribution   of   powers,   we   find   that   of   declaring   war   expressly   vested   in   the  
congress,   where   every   other   legislative   power   is   declared   to   be   vested;   and   without   any   other  
qualification   than   what   is   common   to   every   other   legislative   act.   The   constitutional   idea   of   this  
power   would   seem   then   clearly   to   be,   that   it   is   of   a   legislative   and   not   an   executive   nature   …  
Those   who   are   to   conduct   a   war   cannot   in   the   nature   of   things,   be   proper   or   safe   judges,  
whether   a   war   ought   to   be   commenced,   continued,   or   concluded.   They   are   barred   from   the  
latter   functions   by   a   great   principle   in   free   government,   analogous   to   that   which   separates   the  
sword   from   the   purse,   or   the   power   of   executing   from   the   power   of   enacting   laws.”  
 
Alexander   Hamilton   noted   the   limits   on   presidential   war   powers   in    Federalist   #69 .  
 
"The   President   is   to   be   commander-in-chief   of   the   army   and   navy   of   the   United   States.   In   this  
respect   his   authority   would   be   nominally   the   same   with   that   of   the   king   of   Great   Britain,   but   in  
substance   much   inferior   to   it.   It   would   amount   to   nothing   more   than   the   supreme   command   and  
direction   of   the   military   and   naval   forces,   as   first   General   and   admiral   of   the   Confederacy;   while  
that   of   the   British   king   extends   to   the   DECLARING   of   war   and   to   the   RAISING   and  
REGULATING   of   fleets   and   armies,   all   which,   by   the   Constitution   under   consideration,   would  
appertain   to   the   legislature.1   The   governor   of   New   York,   on   the   other   hand,   is   by   the   constitution  
of   the   State   vested   only   with   the   command   of   its   militia   and   navy."  
 
Article   I,   Section   8,   Clauses   15   and   16   make   up   the   “militia   clauses”   of   the   Constitution.   The  
Constitutional   Charter   for   the   Guard    confirms   that   Article   1   Sec.   8   serves   as   the   basis   for   the  
National   Guard.  
 
“The   Army   National   Guard's   charter   is   the   Constitution   of   the   United   States.   Article   I,   Section   8  
of   the   U.S.   Constitution   contains   a   series   of   ‘militia   clauses,’   vesting   distinct   authority   and  
responsibilities   in   the   federal   government   and   the   state   governments.”  
 
Clause   15   delegates   to   the   Congress   the   power   to   provide   for   “calling   forth   the   militia”   in   three  
situations   only:   
1.to   execute   the   laws   of   the   union,   
2.to   suppress   insurrections,   and   
3.to   repel   invasions.  
 
The   Constitution    requires   Congress   to   declare   war    before   the   president   can   commit   troops   to  
any   offensive   military   action.   It   logically   follows   that   under   the   “laws   of   the   union,”   a  
constitutional   deployment   of   National   Guard   troops   to   an   overseas   combat   zone   can   only   occur  
after   a   congressional   declaration   of   war.  
 
Restricting   National   Guard   troops   to   foreign   deployments   only   after   a   declaration   of   war   merely  
follows   the   constitutional   requirement   laid   out   in   Article   1   Sec.   8.   
 
What   is   the   role   for   the   states?  
 
When   the   federal   government   engages   in   such   blatantly   unconstitutional   actions,   the   states’  
proper   role   is   to   take   action   to   remedy   the   situation.   As   James   Madison   wrote,   in   case   of   a  
deliberate,   palpable,   and   dangerous   exercise   of   powers   not   granted   by   the   Constitution,   the  
states   “have   the   right,   and   are   in   duty   bound,   to   interpose   for   arresting   the   progress   of   the   evil.”  
 
The   authority   to   activate   and   deploy   National   Guard   units   ultimately   rests   with   the   governor.  
 
When   the   federal   government   attempted   to   nationalize   state   militias   during   the   war   of   1812,  
Danile   Webster   stood   on   the   floor   of   Congress   and   urged   states   to   do   their   duty   and   resit.  
 
“The   operation   of   measures   thus   unconstitutional   and   illegal   ought   to   be   prevented   by   a   resort  
to   other   measures   which   are   both   constitutional   and   legal.   It   will   be   the   solemn   duty   of   the   State  
governments   to   protect   their   own   authority   over   their   own   militia,   and   to   interpose   between   their  
citizens   and   arbitrary   power.   These   are   among   the   objects   for   which   the   State   governments  
exist.”  
 
But   the   National   Guard   isn’t   the   Militia!  
 
Article   I,   Section   8,   Clauses   15   and   16   make   up   the   “militia   clauses”   of   the   Constitution.   Clause  
16   authorizes   Congress   to   “provide   for   organizing,   arming,   and   disciplining,   the   Militia.”   
 
Some   argue   that   the   National   Guard   is   not   the   militia   described   by   the   Constitution.   But   the  
creation   of   the   National   Guard   was   based   on   the   power   delegated   to   Congress   by   the   militia  
clauses.  
 
During   the   founding   era,   the   militia   was,   as    George   Mason   described   it ,   “the   whole   people,  
except   a   few   public   officers.”  
 
In   practice,   the   militia   was   made   up   of   every   able-bodied   adult-male   between   16   and   45   to   55.  
 
In   the   Dick   Act   of   1903,   Congress   exercised   its   delegated   power   and   organized   the   militia   into  
today’s   National   Guard,   limiting   the   part   of   the   militia   that   could   be   called   into   federal   service  
rather   than   the   “entire   body   of   people,”   which   makes   up   the   totality   of   the   “militia.”   
 
In   practice,,   today’s   National   Guard   is   governed   by   the   “militia   clauses”   of   the   Constitution,   and  
this   view   is    confirmed   by   the   National   Guard    itself.  
 
The    Virginia   code   defining   the   state’s   militia    helps   clarify   the   distinction.   
 
“The   militia   of   the   Commonwealth   of   Virginia   shall   consist   of    all   able-bodied   residents    of   the  
Commonwealth   who   are   citizens   of   the   United   States   and   all   other   able-bodied   persons   resident  
in   the   Commonwealth   who   have   declared   their   intention   to   become   citizens   of   the   United   States,  
who   are   at   least   16   years   of   age   and,   except   as   hereinafter   provided,   not   more   than   55   years   of  
age.    The   militia   shall   be   divided   into   three   classes:   the   National   Guard,   which   includes  
the   Army   National   Guard   and   the   Air   National   Guard;   the   Virginia   Defense   Force;   and   the  
unorganized   militia. ”    [Emphasis   added]  
 
 
What   About   AUMFs?   
 
Combat   operations   in   the   so-called   War   on   Terror   have   been   based   on   broadly   worded  
Authorizations   to   Use   Military   Force   (AUMFs)   passed   by   Congress   after   9/11   and   before   the  
2003   invasion   of   Iraq.   
 
In   practice,   these   resolutions   authorize   the   president   to   decide   if   and   when   he   wants   to   take  
military   action.   The   AUMF   passed   after   9/11   to   authorize   the   invasion   of   Afghanistan   remains   in  
effect   today.   Presidents   Bush,   Obama   and   Trump   have   all   used   it   to   justify   their   independent  
decisions   to   take   military   action   in   the   Middle   East,   not   just   in   Afghanistan,   but   also   in   countries  
such   as   Somalia,   Syria   and   Libya.   
 
AUMFs   are   not   the   same   as   a   declaration   of   war.   They   flip   the   constitutional   process   on   its   head  
by   placing   decision-making   power   in   the   hands   of   the   president.   This   violates   the   constitutional  
separation   of   powers.   
 
As    James   Madison   put   it ,   “The   executive   has   no   right,   in   any   case   to   decide   the   question,  
whether   there   is   or   is   not   cause   for   declaring   war.”  
 
 
What   About   the   War   Powers   Act  
 
Many   people   justify   presidential   troop   deployments   under   the   War   Powers   Resolution   of   1973.  
But   the   act   itself   fails   to   pass   constitutional   muster.  
Under   this   congressional   act,   the   president   must   inform   Congress   within   48   hours   of   committing  
armed   forces   to   military   action   and   it   prohibits   them   from   remaining   in   combat   for   more   than   60  
days   without   congressional   approval.   The   law   also   provides   a   30-day   withdrawal   period,  
meaning   troops   can   theoretically   remain   in   combat   for   up   to   90   days   with   no   legislative  
approval.  
The   War   Powers   Resolution   effectively   handed   the   executive   branch   the   power   to   engage   the  
U.S.   military   in   combat   anywhere   in   the   world   without   first   getting   a   declaration   of   war   from  
Congress,   as   required   by   the   Constitution.   Congress   took   a   power   delegated   to   it   in   the  
Constitution   and   transferred   it   to   the   president.   In   effect,   it   amended   the   Constitution.  
In   fact,   the   law   disregards   Congress’s   explicit   and   sole   authority   to   declare   war   and   reduces   it   to  
a   mere   suggestion.   In   practice,   the   president   only   has   to   consult   with   Congress,   when   possible  
–   if   it   suits   him.   
No   constitutional   provision   authorizes   Congress   to   transfer   its   delegated   powers   to   another  
party,   including   the   president.   In   fact,   doing   so   violates   basic   legal   rules   of   construction.   In  
contract   law,   when   a   principal   (the   people)   delegates   power   to   an   agent   (the   federal  
government),   the   agent   cannot   transfer   its   delegated   power   to   another   party   without   specific  
direction   within   the   contract.   No   such   authorization   exists   in   the   Constitution.   So,   Congress   can’t  
legally   give   the   president   a   blank   slate   to   make   decisions   about   war   at   his   own   discretion.  
Congress   must   make   that   call   and   make   it   specifically   before   the   initiation   of   military   action.  
Separation   of   powers   wasn’t   merely   an   academic   exercise   in   legal   construction.   The   framers  
delegated   specific   powers   to   each   branch   of   the   government   for   a   reason.   They   didn’t   want  
another   branch   exercising   that   power.   Could   the   judiciary   transfer   its   authority   to   try   cases   to  
Congress?   Could   the   president    re-delegate   his   power   to   appoint   Supreme   Court   justices   to   the  
Supreme   Court?   Of   course   not.   This   would   be   absurd.   And   its   equally   absurd   to   think   Congress  
can   just   transfer   its   authority   to   declare   war   to   the   president.   As   James   Madison   wrote,   “In   no  
part   of   the   constitution   is   more   wisdom   to   be   found   than   in   the   clause   which   confides   the  
question   of   war   or   peace   to   the   legislature,   and   not   to   the   executive   department.  
But   it’s   not   really   a   war,   is   it?  
 
Some   argue   that   limited   military   strikes   don’t   rise   to   the   level   of   “war,”   and   the   president   has   the  
authority   to   authorize   such   actions   without   any   congressional   input   at   all   --   even   under   the   War  
Powers   Act.  
 
But   under   the   Constitution,   a   war   is   a   war   whether   they   call   it   a   war   or   something   else.  
Constitutional   scholar,    Rob   Natelson,   wrote   about   the   legal   meaning   of   the   word   “war”     in   March,  
2011:  
 
“Founding-Era   dictionaries   and   other   sources,   both   legal   and   lay,   tell   us   that   when   the  
Constitution   was   approved,   “war”   consisted   of    any    hostilities   initiated   by   a   sovereign   over  
opposition.    A   very   typical   dictionary   definition   was,   ‘the   exercise   of   violence   under   sovereign  
command   against   such   as   oppose.’    (Barlow,   1772-73).    I   have   found   no   suggestion   in   any  
contemporaneous   source   that   operations   of   the   kind   the   U.S.   is   conducting   were   anything   but  
‘war.’”    [emphasis   added]  
 
All   U.S.   military   actions   qualify   as   “violence   under   sovereign   command.”   And   attacks,   whether  
for   strategic,   political,   or   humanitarian   purposes,   are   always   “over   opposition.”  
 
What   If   the   Pentagon   Threatens   to   Close   Our   Guard   Bases?  
 
When   Rep.   Pat   McGeehan   introduced   Defend   the   Guard   in   West   Virginia,   the   Adjutant   General  
of   the   West   Virginia   National   Guard   claimed   he   got   a   call   from   the   Pentagon   threatening   to   put  
every    West   Virginia   National   Guard   bases   on   the   Base   Realignment   and   Closure   (BRAC)   list.   If  
that   were   to   happen,   communities   around   these   bases   would   take   a   significant   economic   hit,   the  
state   will   lose   revenue   and   the   Department   of   Defense   would   simply   move   units   to   other   states.  
 
You   shouldn’t   fold   under   this   bullying   tactic.   
 
It   remains   unclear   just   how   legitimate   this   threat   really   is.   Closing   bases   and   moving   Guard   units  
would   put   a   significant   logistical   and   financial   strain   on   the   DoD.   It’s   easy   for   an   official   to  
threaten   to   close   every   National   Guard   Base   in   the   state.   It’s   another   thing   to   actually   do   it.  
 
And   the   more   states   that   pass   Defend   the   Guard,   the   more   difficult   it   will   be   for   the   Pentagon   to  
make   good   on   this   threat.   There   is   strength   in   numbers.   As   James   Madison   wrote   about   state  
action   to   stop   unwarrantable   federal   acts    in    Federalist   #46 ,   “The   embarrassment   created   by  
legislative   devices,   which   would   often   be   added   on   such   occasions,   would   oppose,   in   any   State,  
very   serious   impediments;   and   were   the   sentiments   of   several   adjoining   States   happen   to   be   in  
Union,   would   present   obstructions   which   the   federal   government   would   hardly   be   willing   to  
encounter.”  
 
Will   Defend   the   Guard   threaten   National   Security?  
 
Opponents   will   argue   that   prohibiting   the   deployment   of   National   Guard   troops   overseas   will  
threaten   national   security.   But   this   is   not   an   unequivocal   prohibition   on   Guard   deployment.   It  
simply   requires   Congress   to   do   its   job   and   issue   a   formal   declaration   of   war   before   a   state’s  
National   Guard   troops   can   be   federalized.   If   Congress   follows   the   constitutionally   prescribed  
process   for   engaging   in   war,   National   Guard   troops   will   be   available   to   join   the   fight.   
 
Also,   the   Defend   the   Guard   Act   would   not   prohibit   the   immediate   deployment   of   Guard   units   in  
the   event   of   an   invasion   of   the   United   States   itself.  
 
Passage   of   this   legislation   would   pose   no   threat   to   national   security.   It   would   simply   restore   the  
constitutional   process   for   engaging   in   overseas   military   operations.   
 
Hasn’t   The   Supreme   Court   Settled   This   Issue?  
 
During   the   1980s,   some   governors   refused   to   activate   their   states’   National   Guard   units   for  
deployments   to   Central   America   for   training   purposes.   In   response,   Congress   passed   the   “The  
Montgomery   Amendment"   to   the   National   Defense   Authorization   Act   for   Fiscal   Year   1987.   It  
didn’t   completely   strip   the   governors’   power   over   their   state’s   Guard   units,   but   it   does   prohibit  
any   governor   from   “withholding   consent   to   a   National   Guard   unit’s   active   duty   outside   the  
country   because   of   an   objection   to   the   site,   purpose   or   schedule   of   the   duty."  
This   was   intended   to   stop   governors   from   obstructing   overseas   training.  
 
Minnesota   Gov.   Rudy   Perpich   sued,   arguing   that   the   Montgomery   Amendment  
unconstitutionally   infringed   on   the   governor’s   power   to   withhold   consent   to   federal   training  
missions   outside   the   U.S.   during   peacetime..    Perpich   v.   The   Department   of   Defense    went   all   the  
way   to   the   Supreme   Court.  
 
In   1990,   the   US   Supreme   Court   sided   with   the   Department   of   Defense,   ruling   that   the  
Montgomery   Amendment   was   a   constitutional   exercise   of   congressional   power.   In   a   nutshell,  
the   Court   held   that   “Article   I's   plain   language,   read   as   a   whole,   establishes   that   Congress   may  
authorize   members   of   the   National   Guard   of   the   United   States   to   be   ordered   to    active   federal  
duty   for   purposes   of   training   outside   the   United   States    without   either   the   consent   of   a   State  
Governor   or   the   declaration   of   a   national   emergency.”   [Emphasis   added]  
 
From   a   practical   standpoint,   the   Supreme   Court   decision   in    Perpich    does   limit   the   governor’s  
power   to   block   a   state’s   National   Guard   units   deployment   for   training   purposes.   This   follows  
from   the   militia   clauses   in   the   Constitution.   You   find   the   constitutional   authority   to   provide   for   the  
training   of   the   militia   in   Article   I   Sec.   8   Clause   16.   But   while   the   federal   government   can   dictate  
training,   even   overseas,   this   does   not   authorize   the   federal   government   to   activate   state  
National   Guard   units   for   other   purposes.   The   feds   can’t   call   up   the   Guard   to   regulate   commerce,  
deliver   mail   or   enforce   a   bump   stock   band.   These   are   all   outside   of   the   constitutional  
parameters.   
 
In   a   nutshell,   under   the   Montgomery   Amendment   and   the   SCOTUS   decision   in   Perpich,   the   feds  
can   train   National   Guard   units   overseas   and   the   governors   can’t   block   the   deployment.   But  
calling   up   a   National   Guard   unit   for   combat   operations   is   an   entirely   different   matter   that   isn’t  
touched   by   the   Supreme   Court   opinion.   And   nothing   in   the   Montgomery   Amendment   prohibits   a  
governor   from   blocking   deployment   of   National   Guard   units   without   the   constitutional  
requirement   of   a   declaration   of   war.  
 
 
Dual   Enlistment  
 
The   concept   of   “dual   enlistment”   also   creates   constitutional   issues.   
 
Amendments   to   the   National   Defense   Act   of   1933   made   members   of   the   National   Guard   units  
members   of   both   their   state's   National   Guard   and   the   federal   military.  
 
In   effect,   this   erases   the   line   between   the   militia   and   the   standing   army.   It   renders   the   militia  
clauses   as   if   they   do   not   exist.   
 
Federal   courts    have   taken   a   different   view .   
 
"The   spectre   of   pressing   the   dual-enlistment   rationale   to   its   logical   limit   is   matched   by   the  
counterpoint   that   if   the   Militia   Clause   is   interpreted   as   limiting   Congress'   power   to   order   the  
militia   to   active   duty   as   part   of   the   Army,   then   the   Armies   Clause   would   be   without   practical  
application   because   the   states   could   enlist   all   citizens   in   the   organized   militia   and   thereby  
‘abolish’    the   Army."  
 
But   this   contradicts   the   Dick   Act,   which   organizes   the   constitutional   militia   into   the   National  
Guard   with   all   the   limits   imposed   by   Article   I   Sec.   8.  
 
The   federal   government   can’t   have   it   both   ways.   Either   members   of   the   National   Guard   are  
members   of   the   state   militia   as   described   by   the   Constitution   -   as   the   Dick   Act   says   they   are   or  
they   are   part   of   some   new   entity   totally   under   federal   control.   
 
If   the   National   Guard   really   is   the   modern   incarnation   of   the   constitutional   militia   -   and   again   the  
law   that   created   the   Guard   claims   that   it   is   -   Guard   members   can   only   be   called   to   active   duty   in  
the   three   situations   outlined   in   Article   I,   Section   8,   Clauses   15.   There   is   no   constitutional   or  
statutory   authority   for   “dual   enlistment.”  
 
In   short,   either   there's   an   organization   that's   only   authorized   for   those   three   purposes   in   the  
Constitution,   or   there   isn't.   In   practice   today,   there   isn't.  
 
 
 
 
Additional   Talking   Point   to   Be   Aware   Of  
 
Rep.   McGeehan   received   the   following   email:  
 
“U.S.   Army   War   College   did   extensive   paper   on   the   subject   of   your   legislation,   concluding   that   if  
states   ever   succeeded   in   passing   such   legislation,   the   Pentagon   would   simply   transfer   all  
military   assets   belonging   to   a   state's   National   Guard   to   the   U.S.   Army   Reserves   and   other  
federal   reserve   components,   which   they   could   then   mobilize   at   their   discretion   without  
interference   from   state   officials.”  
 
At   this   point,   we   recommend   ignoring   this   argument.   If   it   gets   to   that   point   .and   the   Pentagon  
starts   unilaterally   dictating   these   things   like   a   game   of   chess,   we   will   know   we   are   winning   the  
battle.   Just   the   mere   fact   that   the   brass’   think-tank   are   contemplating   this   seems   to   indicate   our  
strategy   is   being   taken   as   a   serious   threat   to   the   status   quo.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
