  
 
March 18, 202 3 
 
TESTIMONY OF LESLIE ANDERSON                        
President and CEO of the Propane Gas Association of New England  
  
BEFORE THE MAINE  COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND TECHNOLOGY  
 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 655 Resolve, Directing the Public Utilities Commission to Convene a Stakeholder 
Group Regarding Liquefied Propane Gas Systems and the So -called Dig Safe Law  
 
The Propane Gas Association of New England (PGANE) is pleased to have the opportunity to offer its 
comments  regarding LD 1479 .  
 
The Propane Gas Association of New England is a regional alternative energy trade association 
representing members of the propane industry in the 6 New England States. We exist to serve the 
propane industry by promot ing safety, education,  and public awaren ess of the uses of propane. Our 
membership includes  propane companies and suppliers, including numerous  small companies who are 
often family owned and operated, many for several generations.  
 
We stron gly support  LD 1479 .  This resolve directs the Public Utilities Commission to convene a 
stakeholder group to discuss the provisions in law requiring an underground facility damage prevention 
system, commonly called the "Dig Safe Law, " regarding liqu efied propane gas systems that ha ve an 
underground tank or pipe, including recent amendments made to the law regarding liqu efied propane 
gas systems and reducing the administrative burden on or possible exemption of certain liqu efied 
propane gas systems from membership and participation i n an underground facility damage prevention 
system.  
 
This resol ve directs the PUC and the propane industry  to come together to form a stakeholder  group to 
discuss  the scope of the law and determine the best path forward for under grou nd propane line  safety.  
 
Propane suppliers are not utilities , they  do not own underground  lines,  and propane customers may 
change suppliers at will.  All these non -utility characteristic s, including  short line runs on private property 
(such as 5-foot generator lines), require  a more in-depth  stakeho lder group discussion  to clarify legal 
obligations under the statute . 
 
The Dig  Safe system is not d esigned for short runs of underground line on private property, and propane 
companies  who regi ster locations with Dig Safe are often overburd ened by the volume of Dig Safe ticke ts 
that are not associated with their registered locations.  The stakeholder group will discuss the impacts of 
Dig Safe administrative  burdens and determine w hether this sy stem is the appropriate solution for 
various types of propane accounts , or w hether a safer less cumbersome method is appropriate for non -
utility small businesses.  
 

The resolve directs the commission to  submit a  report summarizing  the stakeholder  group's  discussion 
and any recommended legislation to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.  
 
I thank you for the opportunit y to comment before the committee  and ask you to vote Ought to Pass  on 
LD 1479 . 
