WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF MARK ANDERSON 
SAFETY MANAGER, DEAD RIVER COMPANY 
BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND TECHNOLGY COMMITTEE 
REGARDING - LD 1479  Digsafe Resolve  
April 17, 2023 
            
Good afternoon, my name is Mark Anderson. I am the Safety Manager for Dead River Company 
and I thank you for the opportunity to address you today. 
 
Dead River Company is a Maine based company and has been in business in the State of Maine 
for over 100 years.  We have been supplying propane since 1946. We employ over 1300 
workers. With 41 offices in Maine, and we cover nearly the entire State. 
 
We favor the resolve because the current Digsafe rules are not appropriate for the vast amount 
of Propane systems.   Unlike water and natural gas lines, propane systems are not connected to 
a long pipelines installed by the supplier.  Each propane system is connected to a unique tank 
and each tank has a shut off valve.  If a propane line is ever hit by an excavator, unlike water 
lines and natural gas lines, a propane tank is located in the immediate vicinity and each tank 
can easily be turned off.   Also, unlike pipelines, there is only a limited volume of propane in 
each tank, which makes propane installations much safer from a Digsafe perspective.  Because 
propane tanks are either obvious aboveground installations or obvious underground tank 
stations sticking up above the ground, propane facilities are obvious to see and determine 
where there is a line running from the tank to the regulator on the outside of the building. 
 
Propane companies are not utilities.  We do not have separate Digsafe departments.  Propane 
lines are privately owned and by homeowners, not by the propane supplier.  Excavators do not 
often call Digsafe before digging on private residences. Registering all privately owned propane 
lines is overburdensome and would dilute, not improve safety. This is not the answer.  
 
We favor this resolve because it would allow the industry and PUC to study the issue and 
recommend a workable solution.  It would allow us to explore what types of propane facilities 
would benefit from digsafe, who should be responsible for registering the lines, and what other 
safety precautions might work better such as post-excavation leak checks. 
 
As the largest supplier of propane in Maine for over 75 years, it is critical to note that we have 
never had a serious incident related to excavators hitting underground propane tanks or lines. 
 
I urge you to vote ought to pass on this. Thank you for your time, and I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have. 
 
