 
  Litalien Law, PLLC  207-518-8181 413 Alfred St  contact@litalienlaw.com Biddeford, ME 04005 Page 1 of 1 www.litalienlaw.com 
  March 29, 2023  VIA E MAIL  To: The Honorable Veterans and legal Affairs Committee  RE: LD 832  Members of this Honorable Committee,  I represent many medical cannabis providers in Maine.  Concentrates make up close to 60% of their sales and the benefits are far greater than the negatives.  Many patients do not want to smoke cannabis and the concentrates provide them with the ability to receive the medical benefits that the Legislature intended when it passed the legalization of medical cannabis.  Many of my clients are unable to continue to operate because of the laws regarding tobacco delivery.  The Legislature could make a real difference if it addressed the contradictory laws regarding vape products.  Medical providers cannot deliver vape products because even though there is no nicotine or tobacco in the product, Maine law classifies all vape products as tobacco products and concurrently bans the delivery of tobacco products.    The law should distinguish the difference and allow delivery of products that do not contain nicotine or tobacco because the State also licenses medical providers to deliver products with THC.  On one hand the State takes money for cannabis licensing and allows the delivery of products with THC and on the other hand it chokes the business that it just took the money from by banning products that make up a large amount of their annual revenue.  While rec stores may not deliver vape products, allowing rec stores to deliver cannabis has greatly affected the caregivers.  I understand that it levels the playing field, but it seems unlikely that both programs can survive.  The State receives greater tax revenue from the rec program and that is important, but a level-playing field will kill off the medical program.   If the Legislature does not intend to kill off the medical program, I hope it will address the real issues that negatively affect these businesses, most of which are hard-working Mainers operating from their homes and providing for their families.   Respectfully,    Jason G Litalien, Esq 

