 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Senator  Craig Hickman,  Chair  
Representative  Laura Supica , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 832 - An Act to Sustain the Medical Use of Cannabis Program  
 
Dear Senator  Hickman , Representative Supica , and Members of the Committee  on Veterans and 
Legal Affairs : 
 
This letter is to provide information about LD  832, An Act to Sustain the Medical Use of Cannabis 
Program , and the potential impact of the proposed  legislation .  
 
This bill , currentl y a concept draft, seeks to enact provisions of law to sustain the Maine Medical Use 
of Cannabis Program (MMCP), one of Maine’s two cannabis program s regulated by the Department 
of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS)  Office of Cannabis Policy . (22 MR S chapter 558 -
C.)  
 
At present, the Maine Medical Use of Cannabi s Program (MMCP) rules do not require testing of 
products. Statute states that a medical cannabis manufacturing facility “may conduct testing of 
cannabis products or cannabis concentrate manufactured by the facility to research and development 
purposes”1. Mandatory testing of products is an important protection for public health. Policy 
mirroring that of Maine’s Adult - Use program would be beneficial to ensure consumer safety , 
especially for patients served in the medical -use program, some of whom may have compromised 
immune systems  or be also taking  prescription medication to address a condition or symptoms , or 
who may be children.   
 
The MMCP also does not have an exclusive qualifying condition list, making medical cannabis 
overly accessible without ev idence and research supporting the benefits outweighing the risks of use, 
especially for young people whose brains have not fully developed. Re -establishment of a qualifying 
condition list with ongoing re -evaluation as medical research advances is an impor tant consideration 
if sustaining the  medical -use program .  
 
Another important consideration when making a decision about whet her to preserve  and sustain  
MMCP surrounds product marketing in the medical -use program. The Maine Medical Use of 
Cannabis Act does  not prohibit sales promotions and giveaways. Pricing and promotion of any 
product has an impact on vulnerable populations, and reduced price especially has an impact on 
young people (such as 18 -20 year old s with a medical -use certification ) to purchase mo re product 
with limited funds . This could pose an increased risk of diversion to other young people who are not 
 
1 22 MRS 2423 -F 
 
 qualified patients  and who not authorized to possess cannabis for medical -use.  Evidence from work 
with both tobacco and alcohol prevention demonstrates the prominent role of social access from 
friends. In 2021, 11.3% of Maine high school students reported getting or buying their electronic 
vapor products from friend s, family, or someo ne else2. Additionally, 39.3% of Maine high school 
students who report ed past 30 -day alcohol use indicated  that someone gave it to them3. While the 
MIYHS survey did not ask this question relative to cannabis in 2021, it is data that will be collected 
in future survey cycles. Promotions and giveaways are prohibited in the Adult -Use program and the 
same should be considered as an important protection for the MMCP  where  there is less oversight of  
inventory and  ‘donations’ with  both program registrants and unregistered participants permitted to 
donate cannabis products .  
 
A related issue is the absence of a seed to sale tracking system . This tracking system that exists for 
adult -use cannabis is a tool to manage the overproduction of medical -use cannabis in Maine. The 
Maine Office of Cannabis Policy Cannabis Markets & Associated Outcomes Report released in 
Spring 2022, annotated that the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Pro gram had a 6:1 ratio of supply of 
product to demand of product , though t ypically, over time, as states progress in  their timeline post 
market legalization for medical or adult -use, the demand -to-supply ratio decreases as  efficiencies are 
met 4. This demonstrates an extensive overproduction of medical cannabis in Maine. Given the 
absence of this verifiable data, finding the true value of supply for the medical market is more 
challenging and requires assumptions , and this emphasizes the need to consider e xperience of other 
states  as a way to responsibly guide Maine’s cannabis program s. Overproduction drives prices down, 
puts an unnecessary strain on the environment for production5, and opens up the potential for 
diversion of product into the illi cit market. Ensuring limited and traceable production to avoid large 
oversupplies and divergence  is beneficial for the community, the environment, and pricing of 
product6 available to program participants . 
 
In summary , it is for these reasons that we ask the Committee to consider increased protections for 
public health as part of the discussion on how to sustain the MMCP.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. As a concept draft, the Maine CDC awaits language  
that further clarif ies LD 832  and is available to provide additional comments regarding its prevention 
efforts  and the potential impact of the propos al for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
2 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS), 2021  
3 MIYHS 2021  
4 Maine Office of Cannabis Policy Cannabis Markets and Associated Outcomes - Survey Findings and Implications 
(Spring 2022)  
5 Greening the Cannabis Industry . Department of Public Health & Environment. (n.d.). Retrieved February 23, 
2023, from https://cdphe.c olorado.gov/greening -the-cannabis -industry  
6 Foden -Vencil, K. (2020, June 3). Oregon is producing twice as much cannabis as people are using . opb . Retrieved 
February 23, 2023, from https://www.opb.org/news/article/oregon -cannabis -surplus -2019/  

