Scotty Ouellette, Bowdoinham, Maine, info@goldenroadextracts.com 3/29/2023 
Good afternoon Chairperson Hickman and Chairperson Supica and honorable members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Scotty Ouellette, l am a Board member of the Maine Cannabis Coalition, 
and l am registered caregiver and owner/operator of a manufacturing laboratory in Maine. I am also in the 
process of dual certifying my manufacturing laboratory as an Adult Use facility. Today I testify in favor of LD 
893 to protect Maine's medical cannabis program. 
As a caregiver for over 9 years and the operator of a manufacturing facility, I have seen this program grow in 
the backyards in Maine to a program servicing over 100,000 Maine citizens and many who travel from afar to 
utilize Maine’s medical program as visiting qualifying patients. it is imperative that those who know the industry 
and how it operates in Maine are charged with helping modify the laws that manage the industry. For example, 
when l first started my manufacturing facility, we could process only a minimal poundage per day, but with 
equipment improvements and technology improvements, my facility is capable of safely processing about 100 
pounds a day, and the statute is inadequate to serve the industry. 
There are many areas of the statute which are unclear, and some things that are rule-based that ought be 
statute-based such as the random audit testing currently authorized by the rules of the program, but 
unmentioned in statute. l truly believe the only meaningful, ought-to-be-mandated testing is a random spot 
check audit style testing. There is always a way to pass an anticipated and expected test. l have tested 
cannabis before accepting it for processing long before anyone required it (still not required in Maine Medical), 
and l believe in using products that are not poisoned with pesticides for example, but the best way to know that 
folks are not importing or growing pesticide laden products are random spot checks. 
As for residual solvents — once a manufacturer has standard operating procedures that are time tested true 
and has repeatedly tested the process by testing the result, mandating testing on every single batch that is 
processed in the same manner using the same equipment and process - well, it is a huge waste of resources. 
Testing for molds that are present in every breath one breathes and on every vegetable or fruit is ridiculous, 
while testing for aspergillus in products intended for smoking, well, maybe? Again, random spot checks and 
perhaps requiring tests when procedures are updated or changed — these are far more meaningful mandates. 
Random testing should be paid for by program funds. There are many other areas in the statute that are 
unclear and refer to many other parts. Historically, to meet changing needs, the chapter governing the program 
has been amended year after year, and some areas seem to conflict with other areas. 
Please involve the many Maine citizens who have operated in this program for many years to be mindful of 
creating meaningful and sensible laws from which meaningful and sensible rules can be derived. Please deem 
LD 893 ought to pass, and please involve the industry in the process. Thank you for your time and attention to 
this very important legal market in Maine. 
Scotty Ouellette 
207-286-5134
