03/29/2023 Susan Meehan, Sweden, Maine. LD 832, in favor 
207-861-1 945 §i.§2l.d._<%>- m1.9li£l. €>.§3 .@.t1i11ail..992111 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica and honorable members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Susan Meehan. I am a Board member of the Maine Cannabis Coalition 
and a founding member of the Cannabis Council of Maine. i am here to testify in favor of Ld 832 sponsored by 
Representative Boyer. 
In 2013, upon her team of neurologists advice — we were out of options, and I brought our 11 year old daughter 
to Maine seizing out of control experiencing several tonic clonic seizures a day, and as documented on her eeg 
over 1000 myoclonic jerk seizures AN HOUR. We drove to Maine as though her life depended upon it with her 
oxygen, ambu-bag, dangerous barbituates, benzodiazepines and anesthesia meds - all legally prescribed. 
Think 1000 an hour for one moment. Nearly every minute of every day being jerked forward at the waist and 
thrown to the ground. Cyndimae was on 5 anti epileptic drugs (aeds) and bound to a wheelchair for her own 
safety. Walking was nearly impossible. She was underweight even though she loved to eat. She had failed 23 
aeds, two surgeries, several specialized diets. What would you do to save your child? What would you do 
when the third opinion and one of the best pediatric neurology teams in the country tells you that they have 
nothing else to offer? The only thing that ever let her LIVE life was cannabis. Within a month in Maine, 
Cyndimae played in the bright white snow without a seizure forthe first time in her life, swam in cold mountain 
rapids, ran across softball fields and climbed rock walls. I would obtain cannabis flower from trusted caregivers, 
I would extract it in food grade ethanol to a concentrate, I would make oil based tinctures, and drive across3 
state lines to have samples tested in the nearest testing lab. Contrary to instagram allusions/illusions, we've 
been testing in the medical program long before Maine had a legal mechanism by which to do so. Cyndimae 
was the first patient Dr Dustin Sulak had that used the acidic, thca. Thca concentrates were magical to stop 
Cyndimae's myoclonic seizures (which were exasperated by cbd,) and thc stopped her generalized tonic 
clonics. I made a buccally or nasally administered rescue formulation that stopped a generalized tonic clonic 
far faster than diazepam or midazolam ever had and without the dangerous side effects. In 2015, with a historic 
veto override, going to Cony in Augusta, Cyndimae became the first child in the country to legally attend school 
with her cannabis seizure rescue medicine by her side (in my possession). We have been doing this a while, 
amending, fixing here and there, stitching this up... 
It is time that 558C was cleaned up and clarified. It has been so many times amended that many sections refer 
to another section and then another. Some examples of unclarity include: in one section the statute refers toa 
caregiver as a natural person and in another indicates that a caregiver can organize as any business legal in 
the State; there are outdated possession limits, especially for manufacturing facilities; and let's not even 
attempt to discuss municipal authority and regulation in regard to the chapter. The chapter is littered with areas 
that refer a reader to another section of the chapter mid-sentence. It's like a movie that poorly handles 
flashbacks in which one never really knows what time frame they are viewing at any given time. 
The Cannabis Council spent months in meetings with the Department from May 2022 to October 2022 
discussing the unclear areas of the chapter. We agreed upon many points of clarification. While some of the 
chapter will be an easy fix, it is a very complex chapter of law with many moving parts - and it sen/es over 
100,000 citizens of Maine very well. It takes people who know how the program works on the ground in Maine, 
how the program really sen/e patients in Maine, how parents of pediatric patients secure safe medicine for their 
children in Maine; it takes people who know how a caregiver business from a residence works, howa 
storefront works, and how a manufacturing facility with an inherently hazardous substances designation works. 
The industry is appreciative to be involved in improving Maine's program for our patients while not 
compromising patient's medical confidentiality and access to their medicine. I look fon/vard to clarifying this 
chapter of Maine law. Thank-you for your valuable time today.
