‘jg STATE OF MAINE 
, HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
5. SPEAKERS OFFICE 
1i 
, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(Z07) Z87-1315 
William D. Pluecker 
State Representative 
ll33 Finntown Road 
Warren, ME 04864 
(207) 273-3044 
Bill.Pli;ccl<er@lcgislaturc.inainegov 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the entire Labor and Housing 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to present LD 1424, “An Act to Remove the 
Age Requirement for Correctional Staff Retirement Under the I998 Special Plan,” to you 
today. I am Bill Pluecker. I represent House District 44, the towns of Warren, Union, and 
Hope. 
Our Correctional Officers do the unsung work behind the walls of our correctional 
institutions. Every day they come into contact with people convicted of some of the most 
serious crimes in our state. They go to Work to protect us outside the Walls, as Well as 
provide for the safety and security of all the staff and residents of the prisons. Our justice 
system depends on them just as heavily as the law enforcement officers that we come into 
contact with on a more regular basis outside the Walls. 
Despite the intensity of the work and our dependence upon them, their pay is not 
commensurate with the law enforcement officers outside the Walls, and neither are their 
retirement packages. The average life expectancy of a correctional officer in the US is 59 
years old compared to the population at large of 78. Our current law requires that they 
work 25 years on the job and reach the age of 55 before retiring, leaving them on average 
four years to enjoy their retirement before death. Our State Police, Marine Patrol, and 
Game Wardens all currently are eligible for retirement after 25 years of service despite 
their age. I do not have the exact numbers on Sheriffs and Municipal Police Officers, but 
many of them also have the chance to retire after 25 years irregardless of age. 
This is all true While at the same time We are struggling to ﬁll the positions at our 
prisons. Young people Sign on to start work, go through the training program at the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy, begin Work in the prisons, and often quit just months after 
starting. This results in many lock-ins at Maine State Prison that are made necessary just 
District 44: I-lope, Union, & Warren
because of short staffing. In these situations the residents do not have access to their 
educational time, their jobs at the prison, various therapies, or recreational times. This 
adds to the anger and frustration of the residents which makes everyone ’s job more 
difficult. When new hires are brought online into this atmosphere, it is no wonder that 
they often do not stay on the job. 
My hope with this bill is that by recognizing the tremendous work that these 
ofﬁcers do by giving\ parity with other law enforcement officers, new hires will havea 
reason to stay on the job. I have spoken casually with various members of management at 
Maine State Prison, and the feeling is that the retaining some of these new hires and 
keeping some of the longer tenn hires that have no intention of staying on till the age of 
55, will outweigh the near term loss of the staff who become eligible for retirement 
earlier in their career. This is good for the staff as well as the residents who will face 
fewer lock downs and expanded access to programming. This is the programming upon 
which We all depend for the rehabilitation of the residents of the prisons. 
We cannot expect people to go to work day in and day out in stressful, difficult 
situations and receive less than people doing similar work on the outside. It is not fair. As 
a society, we often cast a blind eye to the people working in the prisons as well as those 
living there. If we expect people to be released for the prison and not recidivate, then they 
must have access to a full host of programs to help them take control of their lives. We 
must have staff to make this happen. I hope you will join me in supporting these staff 
who are working tirelessly for our good, and vote this bill through. 
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any of these questions. ‘
