Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
In Support of LD 1424, An Act to Remove the Age Requirement for Correctional Staff 
Retirement Under the 1998 Special Plan, Sponsored by Representative Pluecker 
April 19, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, my 
name is Jeff .\/IcCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service Employees 
Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service 
Employees Association represents over 13,000 workers across the state, including in Corrections. 
Throughout all departments of Maine State Government, the State is experiencing a real struggle 
to recruit and retain employees. State workers feel buried by impossible workloads and camiot 
keep up. In the Department of Corrections, these issues have been longstanding for years. 
Continued forced overtime and stafﬁng shortages are increasing health and safety risks for staff 
and residents. Studies show the health and well-being of corrections workers are directly affected 
by their work environment and that their life expectancy is reduced because of it. 
Across state govemment, recent estimates show one in six positions in Maine State Govemment 
is currently vacant, further exacerbating the workloads and forced overtime of everyone doing 
the public’s work. When you keep trying the same thing repeatedly but are not successful, then 
why not try a different approach? 
Today we are here to ask the committee to consider a different approach to the stafﬁng crisis 
within the Department of Corrections. We are suggesting moving to a straight 25-years-and-out 
retirement plan for the Department. This might be a bill the committee needs to work on to get 
right and could in fact change the ongoing, long-term and chronic issue of stafﬁng within the 
Department. 
In my work, I have encountered many individuals who retired after stressful and demanding jobs, 
including Law Enforcement, and then reentered the workforce doing less stressful and less 
physically demanding work. 
Long term, this legislation could help with stafﬁng shortages and the increasing cost of overtime. 
I want to provide one example of from neighboring state New Hampshire with a slightly better 
beneﬁt than Maine: https://www.jobs.corrections.nh.gov/benefits 
“A career in corrections helps you take care of your family and enjoy life. You can have peace of 
mind that your family will have access to the care they need, when they need it. And with our 
retirement plan, new hires are still eligible to retire by age 52.5 provided they have completed 25 
years of service."
1
We are respectfully asking the committee to allow MSEA, MainePERS and AFSCME to create 
updated language upon completion of 25 years of service and irrespective of the age of the 
member at the time of retirement. 
In order to recruit and retain qualiﬁed employees, the State of Maine must work to address 
inequities and ﬁx issues like this. Please support LD 1424 to help address the hardships that 
Maine workers in the Department of Corrections are experiencing and ensure continuity in the 
quality public services that Maine people count on. 
I am happy to take any questions. Thank you.
