 To whom this may concern.                                                                                                        4/19/2023  
   I would like to thank you for taking your time and reading this. I will try to keep this short as I 
know how busy everyone is. Bill LD 1424 which would remove the age requirement for correctional staff 
covered under the 1998 Special plan, is something tha t is long overdue. Some of you might know the 
challenges and how difficult it is to work inside of a prison, as for most people they will never know 
besides what they see on tv or the internet.  
Men and women dedicate their lives to public service, they get  up every day putting their 
wellbeing and lives at risk by working inside.  Staff are tasked with the care, custody, and treatment of 
violent offenders. Staff are burdened with the things they experience and see daily that is why 
corrections officers have one of the highest rates PTSD and burnout in the nation.  The sad part is most 
will never reach retirement, and for ones that do usually die shortly after. The national life expectancy 
for correctional staff is only 59, and as it sits now our retirement ag e is set at 55 giving us 4 years to 
enjoy after 25 years of service. Does that sound like a good deal? Most people would say NO. Now ask 
yourself would you want this for one of your family members? Or the 18 -year -old high school graduate 
that would have 37  years to do.  
 This is real for us; throughout the years I have lost good friends that didn’t even make it 2 years 
after they retired. Everyday staff are just clinging on to hopes of one day being able to retire. Constantly 
dangerously short staffed, stres sed beyond belief, hiring kids straight out of high school to work in this 
environment and wondering why they quit, or asking why don’t people want to work in a prison? We all 
know why It is extremely hard and most cant do this line of work. Most people wo n’t even consider it. I 
have had plenty of Law enforcement officers say, “NO WAY IN HELL WOULD I WORK IN THE PRISON”. 
Even after all this, Maine is still a leader in the nation when it comes to prison reform. Who do you think 
does the work? It is the profe ssional hard -working men and women of the department of corrections 
that dedicate their lives to their chosen profession.  
We need your help and support to eliminate the age requirement of the retirement and making 
it a flat 25. This would greatly help rec ruitment and retention. It gives people hope , it eases the thought 
of I’m never going to making it, being able to see that there IS in fact a light at the end of the tunnel. 
Other agencies in Maine have already addressed this issue by offering Flat 25 -year  retirements some 
even offering 2/3 retirement pay. It is my hope that you can see that we deserve a flat 25 -year 
retirement and act by passing this bill.  
 
                                                                                                         Sincerely…… Joseph Theriault    
         
 
 
