 
 STATE OF MAINE  
BOARD  OF  NURSING  
158  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  04333- 0158   
JANET T. MILLS  
GOVERNOR  
 
      
 
 KIM ESQUIBEL, PHD, M.S.N., R.N.  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR   
 
  
 
 
PHONE: (207)287-1133 
  
 
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER  
  
 
 
FAX: (207) 287-1149    
 OFFICES  LOCATED  AT:  161  CAPITOL  ST.,  AUGUSTA,  ME 
www.maine.gov/ boardofnursing      
  
April 18, 2023 
 Senator Donna Bailey, Chair Representative Anne Perry, Chair  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333  RE: LD 1447 Resolve, to Authorize the Training of Nursing Assistants by Certified Nursing 
Assistants  
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee:  
 The State Board of Nursing (“Board”) licenses and regulates licensed practical nurses, registered professional nurses and advanced practice registered nurses in Maine. The Board is composed of 9 members – 5 actively practicing registered nurses, 1 actively practicing advanced practice registered nurse, 1 actively practicing licensed practical nur se and 2 public members. The 
Board’s mission is to protect the public by licensing and regulating nurses, and approving prelicensure nursing education programs.    The resolve directs the Maine State Board of Nursing  (BON ) to amend its rules to authorize the 
training of nursing assistants by certified nursing assistants (“CNAs”) who have had at least 8 years of professional experience as a CNA and no disciplinary record.  The BON has concerns with the Resolve as currently written. While the BON a ppreciates and 
understands both the intent and need to increase the nursing assistant workforce, the proposed language may  reduce the current scope of instruction and training. 
 The BON is opposed to LD 1447 and offers the following comments for consideration:  The nursing assistant certification was established under the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations primarily as a Skilled Nursing Facility/Nursing Facility (“SNF/NF”) focused program which is why the federal requirements at 42 CFR § 483.152
 for a nurse to be a 
CNA instructor include: 
 “(5) Meet the following requirements for instructors who train nurse aides:  
 
   
(i) The training of nurse aides must be performed by or under the general supervision of a registered nurse who possesses a minimum of 2 years of nursing experience, at least 1 year of which must be in the provision of long- term care facility services ; 
(ii) Instructors must have completed a course in teaching adults or have experience in 
teaching adults or supervising nurse aides; 
(iii) In a facility -based program, the training of nurse aides may be performed under the 
general supervision of the director of nursing for the facility who is prohibited from performing the actual training; and 
(iv) Other personnel from the health professions may supplement the instructor, including, but not limited to, registered nurses, licensed practical/vocational nurses, pharmacists, dietitians, social workers, sanitarians, fire safety experts, nursing home administrators, gerontologists, psychologists, physical and occupational therapists, activities specialists, speech/language/  
hearing therapists, and resident rights experts. Supplemental personnel must have at least 1 year of experience in their fields .” 
  This Resolve might potentially conflict with federal regulations. While the Department of Health and Human Services oversees the Maine Registry of Certified Nursing Assistants and Direct Care Workers (“Registry”), the Board is responsible for prescribing the curriculum for CNA training programs and the eligibility requirements for listing on the registry as a CNA. 
22 M.R.S. 
§ 1812-G ; 32 M.R.S. §§ 2102(8)  & 2104(4) . Federal law requires the training of CNAs to be 
performed by an RN or under the general supervision of an RN: 
 For a nurse ai de training and competency evaluation program to be approved by the State, it 
must, at a minimum:  
 (5) Meet the following requirements for instructors who train nurse aides:  (i) The training of nurse aides must be performed by or under the general supervision of a registered nurse who possesses a minimum of 2 years of nursing experience, at least 1 year of which must be in the provision of long- term care facility services ; 
 (ii) Instructors must have completed a course in teaching adults or have experience in teaching adults or supervising nurse aide;  
 (iii) In a facility -based program, the training of nurse aides may be performed under the general 
supervision of the director of nursing for the facility who is prohibited from performing the actual training; and  (iv) Other personnel from the health professions may supplement the instructor, including, but not limited to, registered nurses, licensed practical/vocational nurses, pharmacists, dietitians, social workers, sanitarians, fire safety experts, nursing home administrators, gerontologists, psychologists, physical and occupational therapists, activities specialists, speech/language/hearing therapists, and resident rights experts. Supplemental personnel must have at least 1 year of exper ience in their fields ; 
  
 
   2 C.F.R. § 483.152 (emphasis added). The language in Section 483.152 indicates that other health personnel may supplement the RN instructor. Pursuant to the Board’s rules, only RNs can serve as instructors for CNA programs, but memb ers of other disciplines can assist with 
instruction. 02- 380 C.M.R. Ch. 5, § 2(A)(C)(2), § 4(B)(3) (“Only registered professional nurses 
shall serve as classroom and clinical instructors. Members of other disciplines may assist … as necessary and desirable.”)  
 To the extent LD 1447 would completely remove RN oversight over CNA training, it would conflict with 42 C.F.R. § 483.152. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 1447.  Sincerely,  
 
 
Kim Esquibel, PhD, MSN, RN  
Executive Director
 
 

