 
 
LD 1447 Resolve, to Authorize the Training of Nursing Assistants by 
Certified Nursing Assistants 
 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against 
April 25, 2023 
 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee my name is Natalie Trombley, and I am the President of the Organization of Maine 
Nursing Leadership, and my name is Peggy McRae, and I am the President of the Maine Nursing Action 
Coalition.  Together we are providing testimony neither for nor against this bill.  
Maine’s was experiencing a shortage of certified nursing assistants before the pandemic began in 2020 
and is now experiencing a severe shortage of certified nursing assistant.  The Maine Health Care 
Association estimates that nursing homes in Maine lost approximately 10% of their workforce many of 
the workers who left are certified nursing assistants.  Hospitals are also challenged by the shortage of 
nursing assistants with positions posted in hospitals statewide seeking to employ this level of nursing 
support personnel.   
We are all working to address this challenge and unfortunately the solution put forth in the bill before 
you today can not be implemented.   Federal rules require that a certified nursing assistant program 
instructor be a registered  nurse with two years of experience, one year must be in long term care. We 
are in full support of the standard requiring a RN to qualify as an instructor, but the one year of long-
term care experience is a challenging standard to meet.  Many nurses who want to teach do not have 
one year of long-term care experience.  For example, hospitals have made significant investments 
supporting nursing education programs to expand student capacity.  Our nurses serve as preceptors, 
part time or adjunct faculty for student clinical experiences in our hospitals.  This is a nurse with a 
master’s degree in nursing teaching associate degree or bachelor degree nursing students. This nurse 
would not qualify to teach the certified nursing assistant program without one year of long-term care 
experience.   
We understand that there will be a request to revise this bill to ask the Department of Health and 
Human Services to seek a waiver from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to waive the one 
year of long-term care experience requirement, we are in full support of this recommendation. 
Thank you. 
 

