Here is my testimony 
Good afternoon members of the transportation committee. Thank you for letting me speak about the 
proposed legislation LD 125. 
My name is Albert Joy. I have an background in law enforcement and roadway safety. I am the owner of 
Dirigo Driving Academy, and a board member of MEDTSEA (Maine Driver Traffic Safety Education 
Association). l believe in safety, quality and accountability when teaching our new drivers. 
Maine has a quality driver education system to teach new drivers how to drive safely. Allowing the 
driving instructor to also be the examiner eliminates quality control. There must be a separation of 
powers with checks and balances to continue to keep our roads safe. According to the National Highway 
Transportation Administration road way fatalities are up 30% nation wide as of 2022 and are still getting 
worse. Maine's State License Examiners are an impartial judge of a new driver's capabiIity's. Allowing 
driving schools to administer the road tests will eliminate this crucial safety check in our system. Driving 
Schools providing the state license exam will lead to biased outcomes for the new driver vs a true test of 
a new driver's capabilities. Please do not allow this bill out of this committee. There are too many 
conflicts of interest in allowing private businesses to administer the road test which is the most 
important test a young person will take in the State of Maine. This is a life and death decision and it 
must be made by an impartial judge! In the year 2022 Maine had the highest roadway fatalities since 
2007. Maine roads have been becoming more dangerous and this law will exacerbate this situation and 
hurt Maine kidsl l would encourage all driving instructors that would like to become State Examiners to 
apply to work for the BMV. There are schools currently unable to handle and finish students in a timely 
manner. Giving driving schools the responsibility of providing road tests will lead to lowering standards 
to keep customers satisfied. Students may say "go to this driving school if you want your licenses ” or 
"don't go to that school because you won't get your license" 
I would like to thank Larry Boivon and his staff of examiners for doing an outstanding service for our 
community. Please keep this important role in the capable hands of the Maine Bureau of Motor 
Vehicles!i 
The consequences of this bill will be far reaching. Please end thisbill here. Thank you for your time. 
Thanks, AJ ‘ ii 
l:
l 
ll 31'r
I 
El 
ii 
ll 
fl 
ll 
rt
§_
