Daniel W Walker I 
dwa|ker@preli.com _ 
TESTIMONY OF ANNE E. SEDLACK 
ON BEHALF OF MAINE INDEPENDENT COLLEGES ASSOCIATION 
BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1264, Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Update Maine's 
Public Policy on Higher EducationI 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Anne Sedlack, and I am an attorney with Preti Flaheity, and I am here 
today on behalf of the Maine Independent Colleges Association (MICA) to testify neither for nor 
against LD 1264.' 
While MICA supports studying higher education opportunities in Maine, the Commission should 
have included at -least one member representing independent colleges of this State. 
According to section ﬁve, the duties of the Commission shall review all related laws and rules 
addressing the State's public policy on higher education ... and make recommendations for 
potential legislation changes. ” And that the Commission will “analyze present and ﬁiture goals, 
including but not limited to expanding access to affordable high-quality higher education to help 
students achieve postsecondaiy success in the 2 1 st century. ” This indicates that the Commission 
will not just be focused on public higher education but rather all higher education. 
1 . 
MICA represents ll private, nonproﬁt colleges and universities throughout Maine that serve ovei 
25,000 students, over 7,000 of whom are from Maine. These institutions are located in 
municipalities of all sizes across the State, ﬁ'om Maine’s largest city to small tourist towns and 
farming communities. Collectively, the ll institutions are an economic force and an integral part 
of Maine’s Higher Educational eco-system. While they share the attributes of being private and 
nonproﬁt, these institutions are highly diverse and serve very different aspects of the educational 
needs of Maine people. Together they: 
0 Employ over 6,000 Maine workers.- 
0 Have a total payroll in excess of $340 million. 
0 Have direct expenditures of over $615 million. 
0 Have an estimated economic impact on Maine’s economy of over a billion 
dollars each year.»
~ 
0 Directly contribute close to $2 million to municipalities. 
Q Value of community service is over $24 million. 
1 
Bates College, Bowdoin College, Colby College, College of the Atlantic, Husson University, Maine College of 
Art, Roux Institute at Northeastern University, St. Joseph’s College of Maine, Thomas College, Unity College, and 
University of New England. 
173907061
0 Provide nearly $55 million in ﬁnancial aid to Maine students. 
1 Draw nearly 300,000 visitors to our state each year. 
We believe in a robust public system, and we also think that private schools can be a valuable 
partner in developing a strong higher education system that beneﬁts students, families, 
communities, and this State. ,' 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments, and we look forward to working with 
the Committee on these issues. If this passes, please consider adding a member representing the 
independent colleges of the State. Thank you.t 
l7390706.l
