April 3, 2023 
Testimony Submitted by:  
Catherine R. Ryder, LCPC, NCC, ACS 
Chief Executive Officer, Tri-County Mental Health Services (TCMHS) 
 
Testimony in support of; LD 600 "An Act to Expand Availability of Naloxone 
Hydrochloride" 
SUMMARY: LD 600 This bill allows an overdose prevention program, with the express 
consent of a municipality, to provide and maintain naloxone hydrochloride in a visible and 
publicly accessible wall-mounted box or other container in municipal places to be used by a 
member of the public in response to an opioid-related drug overdose. The bill also provides 
immunity from criminal and civil liability to municipalities and overdose prevention programs 
for providing or maintaining the naloxone hydrochloride containers 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the committee, 
Good morning, 
My name is Catherine Ryder and I serve as the chief executive officer for Tri-County Mental 
Health Services (TCMHS) which serves Western Maine and Northern Cumberland County.  I am 
also here as the mother of an adult son who experienced a fatal overdose from fentanyl poisoning 
on December 2021.  I submit this testimony in support of LD 600 and ask that you would do the 
same, and by so doing, choose life.  
My advocacy is premised in research, experience in the field, and personal experience.  In 
supporting this bill, we will ensure optimal care for those we serve and maintain critical safety 
nets for the health and welfare of our Maine communities. I have served in this field for some 
forty years now, passionate about mission-driven work and meeting the needs of those most 
marginalized, disenfranchised, and often voiceless. I’ve been blessed to witness many recovery 
journeys, including many that would not have happened were it not for naloxone intervention.   
Over the 30+ years I’ve worked at Tri-County Mental Health Services, the level of risk in our 
client population continues to rise. Those seeking services are more complex, and many have 
histories that include significant trauma with resulting co-occurring mental health and substance 
misuse. We’ve watched overdose deaths grow exponentially over the years, most notably during 
the COVID pandemic when isolation, anxiety and despair mounted.  
Our agency values of harm reduction promote an environment of no judgement, providing an 
opportunity to talk openly about how life might or could be different when each individual is 
ready. We provide services in the office, in the home, on the streets, and in collaboration with 
community leaders. If the towns and cities of Maine are to prevent another generation of losses, 
we must band together and bring EVERY resource we have to bear on this growing and insidious 
disease that robs us of our loved ones, neighbors and friends.  
TCMHS is deeply invested in collaboration. We can connect the dots to organizations and 
resources across the community to include EMS, primary care, behavioral health, recovery 
communities and other basic needs.  In the face of a pandemic we’ve had to develop new 
pathways to care, and through well-established partnerships, have been able to move the needle 
toward creating a “Recovery Ready Community”. There can be no wrong doors for prevention, 
intervention or treatment. Naloxone is a life-saving intervention. The alternative is death.  
 
It is my greatest wish to ensure the highest quality of care for the individuals our communities 
serve, and whenever possible to support and facilitate recovery journeys and hope, but most 
importantly, to save other families from experiencing the tremendous grief many of us are now 
living with. Your support of this bill is a nod to providing life-saving interventions.  We need all 
hands-on deck to accomplish this goal.   
Thank you for your time.  I remain available to answer any questions you may have.  
Best Regards, 
Catherine  
Catherine R. Ryder, LCPC, NCC, ACS 
Chief Executive Officer 
Tri-County Mental Health Services 
 
