STATE OF MAINE
  
GOVERNOR ’S OFFICE OF POLICY INNOVATION AND THE FUTURE  
181  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  
04333 -0181 
GORDON SMITH  
DIRECTOR , OPIOID RESPONSE  
PHONE 207

624

7458    WWW .MAINE .GOV /FUTURE   
 
 
April 3, 2023 
 Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Rep. Michele Meyer, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine State Legislature  
 Re:  L.D. 600, An Act to Expand Availability of Naloxone Hydrochloride  
 Dear Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyers and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee:  
 I am Gordon Smith, of East Winthrop, Maine and it is my pleasure to submit this testimony in favor of L.D. 600 on behalf of Governor Janet T. Mills for whom I serve as Director of Opioid Response.  
  L.D. 600 amends Maine’s naloxone distribution law (Title  22, section 2353) by clarifying that an 
overdose prevention program, as defined in the existing law, may provide and maintain naloxone in a container of some type on publicly accessible property of a municipality, so long as the governing body of the town or city provides consent to the placement.  While some municipalities have pro-actively already placed naloxone in such locations, others have been hesitant or advised by their 
attorneys that the statute is unclear or expressed concern about liability.  T his amendment to the law 
clarifies this authority and provides immunity consistent with the existing immunity provided to 
others under the law.  
 As you well know, 2022 was the most lethal in the state’s history.  But partially because of the presence of na loxone, over 9300 individuals survived an overdose last year, representing 93% of all 
overdoses.  In other words, the 716 individuals who died of an overdose last year represented less than 7% of all the overdoses that occurred.  But more could have been r evived with this life -saving 
medication if more Narcan kits were available in public places.  I am aware of one municipality that had 11 overdoses in the city library within the past 18 months.  Passage of this legislation would make it possible for us to make naloxone more readily for those municipalities that were interested.  
 Naloxone is a miracle drug that reverses the effects of an opioid overdose but opioids such as fentanyl act quickly and it is important to get to the individual as soon as possible. Unfortunately, in 52% of the cases last year when 911 was called, the individual was deceased by the time first responders arrived.  Placing Narcan in places where bystanders can assist an individual will save lives and give individuals struggling with substance use disorders the opportunity to seek recovery and have the same opportunities their fellow citizens have to lead a joyful and productive life.  Passage of this bill will assist us in getting naloxone in the places where it is most likely to be use d.  
Pure and simple, this bill is about saving lives.  
 
I am sorry I could not be with you for the public hearing today but I will be at the work session and 
be happy to provide whatever additional information you may need and to answer any question you may have.  Finally, I want to thank Rep. Craven for sponsoring the bill and also thank the many co-
sponsors. And thank you for your time and attention.  
Sincerely,  
 
Gordon Smith, J.D. 
Director of Opioid Response  
Email: Gordon.Smith@maine.gov Cell: 207- 592-0859 

