295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 600 
“An Act to Expand Availability of Naloxone Hydrochloride.”  
Sponsored by Representative Craven 
April 3, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy and I 
am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 600, "An Act 
to Expand Availability of Naloxone Hydrochloride.” This proposal would allow an 
overdose prevention program, with the express consent of a municipality, to 
provide and maintain naloxone hydrochloride in a visible and publicly accessible 
wall mounted box or other container in municipal places to be used by a member 
of the public in response to an opioid related drug overdose. The bill also provides 
immunity from criminal and civil liability to municipalities and overdose 
prevention programs for providing or maintaining the naloxone hydrochloride 
containers. 
 
Access to the opioid overdose antidote is essential. The opioid antidote, naloxone 
is an inexpensive drug that works to reverse an opioid overdose by reversing the 
opioid effects and restoring breathing. Without any potential for abuse, it has 
been used with efficacy and safety in emergency rooms and ambulances in the 
United States for over forty years. Thousands of people have been saved with 
naloxone distributed by community-based overdose prevention programs. 
However, barriers still exist. 
 
Individuals with substance misuse often feel shame and stigma regarding their 
drug use. The United States has made drug use a criminal offense, rather than a 
disease requiring chronic care and treatment. Overdose occurs in public spaces all 
the time, which could be avoided if naloxone was easily accessible. Much like AED 
machines, first aid kits, and EpiPens.  
 
The Alliance thanks Representative Craven for bringing forward this important 
lifesaving proposal and further respectfully requests that the bill is amended so 
that these Naloxboxes contain Fentanyl Testing Strips (FTS) and guidance for use 
created by Maine’s Harm Reduction organizations. Most of the current drug 
supply is being tainted by the dangerous opioid fentanyl. 
 
 ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
 
Fentanyl test strips are a low-cost method of helping prevent drug overdoses and reducing harm. FTS 
are small strips of paper that can detect the presence of fentanyl in drugs. According to the United 
States Center for Disease Control and Prevention, "Fentanyl Testing Strips provide people who use 
drugs and communities with important information about fentanyl in the illicit drug supply so they 
can take steps to reduce risk of overdose.”1 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of this important life-saving legislation. I am 
happy to answer any questions you have for me and to bring any information you need to the work 
session.  
 
 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Accessed on 04.01.2023. 
https://www.cdc.gov/stopoverdose/fentanyl/fentanyl-test-strips.html   
