 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of Behavioral Health  
11 State House Station  
41 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -2595 ; Fax: (207) 287 -9152  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of  Director Sarah Squirrell  
Office of Behavioral Health , Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee  
In Support  of LD 600 An Act to Expand Availability of Naloxone Hydrochloride  
 
Sponsor: Rep. Cra ven 
April 3 , 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers, and Members of the  Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services , this testimony is being submitted on behalf of the Office of 
Behavioral Health (OBH) within the Department of Health and Human Services. The 
Department would like to thank  Representative s Craven , Zager, Cloutier, Doudera, Gere, 
Mastraccio, Meyer , Perry, and Rielly as well as Senator Rotundo , for highlighting the need for 
increased access to life saving interventions in response to an opioid related drug overdose. This 
testimony  is in support of LD 600, An Act to E xpand Availability of Naloxone Hydrochlori de. I 
would like to offer the following information for your consideration.  
 
 This bill seeks t o allow overdose prevention program s, with the expressed consent of a 
municipality, to provide  and maintain visible  and publicly accessible wall-mounted boxes  or 
other containers,  containing naloxone hydrochloride , in municipal places  so that it may be used 
by members of the public in response to an opioid -related overdose. This LD would also provide 
immunity from crim inal and civil liability to municipalities and overdose prevention programs 
for providing or maintaining the naloxone hydrochloride containers.  This bill aligns with 
infrastructure that is already in place and su pports existing prevention efforts.   
 
 The M aine Naloxone Distribution Initiative (MNDI) is a state -based naloxone 
distribution program  that make s naloxone more widely and readily available, affordable, and 
accessible. The MNDI is broken into four catchment areas and assigned a primary Tier 1 (T1) 
naloxone distributor. Each T1 is responsible for distributing naloxone to requesting agencies or 
persons within their respective catchment areas . Once an agency is trained in overdose education  
and naloxone distribution (OEND) and receives state -funded nalo xone from a T1, they become a 
Tier 2 (T2)  distributor . Some  T2’s are considered redistributors, while other T2’s keep naloxone 
on hand  only in  case of an overdose emergency. The current stru cture supports Priority D, 
Strategy 14 in the Governor’s Opioid Response Strategic Action Plan to “Ensure widespread 
distribution and ease of access to naloxone by the general public ”. The provision of wall-
mounted box or other container s (widely known as Naloxboxes ) within municipalities would 
support low barrier access  to life -saving medication in  urban and rural communities allowing  
immediate  response to an opioid -related overdose  while awaiting the arrival of emergency 
medical personnel  thus improving chances of survi val. In addition, the municipalities would have 
access to their community -based overdose prevention program  for education and support.  
 
 Furthermore, there are existing programs in the State that have supported efforts  to 
provide access to naloxone throug h the placement of Naloxboxes  within high -risk, high -risk 
 
 communities . For example, Project Support You in the Lewiston area has  collaborated with 
several sites in Lewiston -Auburn, including local bu sinesses, non -profits, sites that have 
experienced increased overdoses, etc. , to place Naloxboxes.  Naloxboxes provide simple -to-use, 
life-saving tools to community members so they can provide necessary intervention when an 
opioid -related overdo se emergency arises.  One wall -mounted Naloxbox most  commonly 
contains two  to four  doses of nasal naloxone, simple instructions on how to use the medication, 
and a rescue breathing barrier device. Although overdose rescue should not be the only strategy 
used in our opioid response efforts , it remains a very  important one.  
 
 The State of Maine has one of the strongest Good Samaritan laws in the country . In 
alignment with the public law , LD600 seeks to provide immunity  to municipalities  to further 
bolster  overdose  prevention efforts  when an individual is rend ering aid at the scene of an 
overdose. Partners throughout the state continue to provide educat ion on the importance and 
impact of Maine’s Good Samaritan Law to all people of Maine.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
