 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Support of  
LD 1413 , An Act to Amend the Laws Establishing a Property Tax Stabilization Program for 
Senior Citizens    
 
April 12, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in support o f LD 1413 on  behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
As MMA has stated before, municipal offici als are relieved to learn that there is interest 
among members of the Legislature and the Taxation Committee to address the issues associated 
with the implementation, administration, and the cost of the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior 
Citizens law.  While the intent to deliver property tax relief to Maine’s senior homeowners is 
supported by municipal leaders, the manner in which the law achieves that goal is of tremendous 
concern.  The Act is overly generous; provides relief to some of the state’s wealthiest 
homeowners; shifts tremendous administrative burdens and costs onto assessors; relies on the 
will of each newly elected Legislature to honor the commitment to fully reimburse 
municipa lities; and allows an eligible homeowner to carry the stabilized assessment from 
community to community.  Additionally, the law requires qualifying homesteaders to apply for 
the program annually, with the penalty associated with failing to do so being the loss of the 
stabilized tax amount.  
The proposal seeking to link eligibility for the stabilization program to income found in 
LD 1314 is a step in the right direction.  The change would decrease the law’s price tag, ther eby 
increasing the odds that  100% in state reimbursement would be available to municipalities  in 
perpetuity.    
While municipal officials appreciate and support this change, much work remains to be 
done to the program to make it financially sustainable and to reduce the pressures on limited 
municipal resources.  To that end, Rep. Maureen Terry has submitted legislation on behalf of 
MMA’s Legislative Policy Committee that seeks to replace the tax stabilization program with an 
enhanced and tiered homestead exemption targeted to seniors who meet  certain income 
standards.   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 1-800-452-8786.   

