TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 4/12/23 
LD 1413 — An Act to Amend the Laws Establishing a Property Tax Stabilization 
Program for Senior Citizens 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee —- good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1413, An Act to Amend 
the Laws Establishing a Properly Tax Stabilization Program for Senior Citizens. 
This bill establishes an income eligibility requirement for the senior property 
tax stabilization program and requires certiﬁcation of eligibility by the State Tax 
Assessor. In addition, it repeals the provision in current law that eligibility for the 
program may be transferred to a different municipality if an eligible individual 
changes homesteads. The Administration is not opposed to either the repeal of 
location transferability or the income eligibility requirements but does want to raise 
important concerns with this bill and offer potential alternatives for consideration. 
The ﬁrst issue is that of deferral applicants who are not required to ﬁle 
income tax returns with the State. Because Maine Revenue Services does not 
possess the information necessary to verify the income of an applicant unless they 
ﬁle an income tax return with the State, ﬁling an income tax return would 
necessarily become a requirement of the stabilization program. Many of these new 
income tax ﬁlers would qualify for refundable State income tax credits, and so
l
there would be positives to this requirement, however, it is still an important factor 
to consider. While it might be possible for MRS to devise a separate method for 
applicants to report their income to the State, having separate income reporting 
methods would be more burdensome on both taxpayers and the State. 
The second issue is the difficulty in connecting the property and income tax 
systems, as is required by this bill. The property tax is predominantly administered 
by municipalities, has differing due dates set by those municipalities, consists of 
public information, does not contain social security numbers, and often contains 
different name and address information than that reported on income tax returns. 
These differences make using income tax data to verify a property tax beneﬁta 
difﬁcult task and raises important issues that are not addressed by this bill. 
Instead of conditioning the property tax stabilization program on income, 
there are two other approaches the Administration would like to suggest for 
consideration. 
First, to better apply income eligibility limits, the Administration suggests 
replacing the property tax stabilization program with an increased property tax 
fairness credit for seniors. By providing property tax relief through the income tax 
code, instead of using income tax information to provide a property tax beneﬁt, the 
difﬁculties of coordinating the two systems are removed, creating a beneﬁt that is 
easier for seniors to access, and for municipalities and the State to administer. 
An increase in the PTFC would allow the Committee to target relief to those 
low-income seniors who are struggling to afford their property tax payments by 
refunding property tax payments above a certain percentage of their income. In 
addition, the PTFC would provide relief to renters, who are also burdened by high
2
property taxes assessed on their apartments, and who are among the most housing 
insecure seniors. 
Second, if the goal is a simple beneﬁt that does not require the ﬁling of an 
income tax retum, an alternative for consideration is the approach taken by Senator 
Bennett’s bill, LD 130, in which the property tax stabilization program is replaced 
by an increased homestead exemption for all seniors, regardless of income. 
The Administration would also like to note the following technical issues 
with this bill: 
0 The new language makes it unclear who is responsible for determining 
annual eligibility for the Stabilization program. The new subsection 1 
requires Maine Revenue Services (“MRS”) to certify annually that the 
applicant is an “eligible individual, ” but the existing subsection 3 still states 
that the municipality makes that determination. 
0 While MRS could certify age and income (at least for those who ﬁle income 
tax returns), MRS generally would not have the information available to 
determine whether an applicant had owned a homestead for 10 years, for 
example. 
0 It also should be clariﬁed for which year the applicant must meet the income 
threshold in Sec. 4 of the bill. A taxpayer ﬁling for eligibility determination 
by December 1 will not yet have ﬁled an income tax return for that year. 
¢ Similarly, it is unclear how and to whom MRS would be certifying the age, 
income, and other information. Conﬁdentiality provisions could prevent 
MRS from providing information on an applicant ’s income directly toa 
municipality without an express release in writing from the applicant ora 
conﬁdentiality exception in law.
3
0 The cost-of-living adjustment language in Sec. 3 of the bill is in Chapter 
841, which deals with inﬂation adjustments speciﬁcally for income taxes. It 
would make more sense to move the language to either Part 2 of Title 36 
(Property Taxes) or Chapter 908-B (Stabilization) with a reference back to 
the deﬁnitions in Chapter 841. 
0 For taxpayers, to verify the eligibility of each applicant annually, they will 
be required to not only ﬁle armual returns with the municipality of residence, 
but also ﬁle some type of annual request for certiﬁcation with the State, 
showing evidence of residence and potentially evidence of income if they do 
not or have not ﬁled a Maine income tax return. This will add increased 
complexity and confusion for taxpayers. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
4
