 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and 
cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to 
Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Officer & Director of Government Affairs  
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
 
In SUPPORT of 
 
LD 1733, An Act to Require the Revenue Forecasting Committee to Prepare Economic Impact 
Statements for Certain Legislation 
 
 
May 2, 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs: 
 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all 
tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA’s 1500 members includes lodging, restaurants, 
camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, amusements, and cultural and 
historical attractions. I present this testimony in support of LD 1733. 
 
This bill would provide a method to measure the impact of the Department of Economic and 
Community Development’s 10-year Economic Development Strategy for Maine by requiring an 
economic impact statement for any legislation that creates a new workforce program or amends 
employment, labor, or taxation laws. The economic impact statement would have to provide “a 
detailed description of the extent to which the proposed legislation conforms with the actions, goals, 
and strategies outlined in the State’s 10-year strategic economic development plan.” 
 
LD 1733 would provide one method of measuring the impact of the Economic Development Strategy 
by requiring an economic impact statement that tracks the strategic plan for any legislation that creates 
a new workforce program or amends employment, labor, or taxation laws. As you know, the way the 
legislature and committees function leaves legislators with little option but to only look at bills in 
isolation and not in terms of a long-term economic development strategy or how they might enhance or 
detract from its goals.   
 
MTA works closely with the Department of Economic and Community Development, and we 
appreciate all of the hard work being done by Commissioner Johnson and her team. We hope to 
contribute to and enhance that work outlined by DECD and being carried out by all state departments; 
and we believe that this bill can help with that goal.  
 
I respectfully ask to you to support LD 1733. Thank you for your time and consideration. 

