PHONE:     (207) 623 -7900                                        TYY Users Call Maine Relay 711                                                         FAX (207) 287 -2947 
 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in programs, services and employment.  
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.  
 
      
  
 
 
        
Testimony of Mark McInerney,  
Center for Workforce Research and Information, Maine Department of Labor  
Against LD 1733 – “An Act to Require the Revenue Forecasting Committee to 
Prepare Economic Impact Statements for Certain Legislation”  
To the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs Committee. My name is Mark McInerney, I am the Director of the Center for Workforce 
Research and Information (CWRI) at the Maine Department of Labor ( hereafter referred to as the 
Department). I am writing on behalf of the Department a gainst LD 1733, “An Act to Require the 
Revenue Forecasting Committee to Prepare Economic Impact Statements  for Certain 
Legislation.”  
 
The proposed legislation is likely to require the Center for Workforce Research and Information to complete additional analysis work in collaboration with the Revenue Forecasting Committee and other state agencies to deliver eco nomic impact analyses for future legislation that is related 
to the areas of Maine’s labor market and workforce.  Compliance with LD 1733 would require 
additional resources  be allocated to the Center for Workforce Research and Information  to meet 
this addit ional workload. 
 Testimony already offered by the Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy and the Office of the State Economist summarizes well the rigorous nature of the work and the limitations of economic impact analyses. If enacted, this legislation is likely to increase the workload of the staff at the  Center for Workforce Research in the areas of  background research, identification of 
and collection of  the most relevant data to be used in such economic impact analyses. I anticipate 
that the Center for Workforce Research and Information will not have the resources or staff capacity to complete this additional workload.  
 We at the Center for Workforce Research and Information are a team of 13 full time staff. Most of our staff time is dedicated to producing Maine’s labor statistics involving tasks such as reviewing information reported by employers to the Department through survey response or 
administrative data collection, assigning the appropriate industry code, occupation code or geography code to job an d wage data, reviewing and analyzing data for quality, identifying 
outlying data, preparing data for publication and contacting employers via phone and email to illicit survey response or clarify information that has been provided. Most of this work is federally funded by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.S. Department of Labor 
Employment and Training Administration. The Center for Workforce Research and Information has cooperative agreements with these federal partners and required deliverables to meet as part of the terms of these agreements. Our staff all have full -time workloads with most our total staff STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
CENTER FOR WORKFORCE  RESEARCH  AND  INFORMATION  
45 COMMERCE DRIVE  
#118 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
04333 -0118 Janet T. Mills  
GOVERNOR  Laura A. Fortman  
COMMISSIONER  
 
Mark McInerney  
DIRECTOR  
 
 

time dedicated to meeting required federal deliveries and producing labor statistics of the highest 
possible quality.  
