TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee 
Hearing Date: May 2, 2023 
LD l733 — “An Act to Require the Revenue Forecasting Committee to Prepare 
Economic Impact Statements for Certain Legislation” 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs Committee - good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, 
Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services (DAF S). I am testifying at the request of the Administration 
and on behalf of the Revenue Forecasting Committee (RFC) members who work in 
DAF S Against LD I 733 — “An Act to Require the Revenue Forecasting Committee 
to Prepare Economic Impact Statements for certain Legislation.” 
The three DAFS members of the RFC are the State Budget Ofﬁcer, the State 
Economist, and the Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy. 
This bill requires that, at the request of 3 or more members of a legislative 
committee, the Revenue Forecasting Committee (RFC) must prepare an economic 
impact statement for any legislation before that legislative committee or legislation 
being prepared by that legislative committee that creates a new workforce program 
or amends employment, labor, or taxation laws. The request must be made by the 
Legislators within 7 days of the legislation's referral to the legislative committee. 
The RFC must issue the economic impact statement within 21 days of the receipt 
of the request and not later than the ﬁnal work session on the legislation. Any 
amendment introduced that would affect the economic impact statement of the 
original legislation must also include an economic impact statement.
1
The RFC may coordinate with relevant state agencies and departments to gather 
data, analysis, and other information necessary to prepare the economic impact 
statement. 
The requirement that the RFC prepare an economic impact statement for any 
legislation that creates a new Workforce program or amends employment, labor or 
taxation laws is beyond the current capabilities of the committee. Compliance with 
such a requirement during the legislative session would require a signiﬁcant 
increase in resources to the Ofﬁce of the State Economist, the Bureau of the 
Budget, the Ofﬁce of Tax Policy, the Department of Labor’s Center for Workforce 
Research and Information (CWRI) and likely the Ofﬁce of Fiscal and Program 
Review. Accordingly, we recommend that this requirement be eliminated. 
Economic impact statements should only be required in rare cases, and only with 
the joint approval of Legislative Leadership and the Administration. 
Additionally, some of the reporting requirements, speciﬁcally the ﬁrst three 
items in Part C, require the RFC to offer opinions on policy. Representatives who 
are statutory members of the RFC should be insulated from the political aspects of 
policymaking in order to uphold independence and maintain trust in revenue 
forecasts and estimates. 
Ideally high-quality evidence on the impact of similar policies could inform 
an economic impact statement, but in many cases such evidence will not exist, or 
the evidence may be ambiguous or conflicting. At best, these types of analyses 
provide qualitative guidance on the merits of a policy, but not the hard numbers 
required by this bill. See the attached explanation of the model(s) currently 
available to the Ofﬁce of the State Economist that would be used to provide an 
economic impact analysis.
2
In conclusion, the bill as currently drafted is not feasible with existing 
resources - the committee members all have more than full-time day to day 
commitments and our economic modeling tools are not all encompassing; puts at 
risk the independent and apolitical structure of forecasts and impacts; and in most 
cases will likely not allow for enough time or capacity to comprehensively meet 
the requirements. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from the affected ofﬁces will be here for the Work Session to 
provide additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions
Explanation of Current Economic Modeling Capabilities 
Ofﬁce of the State Economist 
Economic impact models are commonly used to estimate the economic 
effects of proposed legislation. The Ofﬁce of the State Economist maintains a 
REMI PI+ statewide, 70 industry sector model that is a conjoined input-output and 
econometric model that allows for the estimation of economic and ﬁscal impacts. 
While a useful tool, there are several limitations to the model. Economic impact 
models rely on certain assumptions and data inputs that may not accurately reﬂect 
the real-world complexity of economic systems or fully consider the distributional 
impacts on different demographic groups. The REMI PI+ model currently 
maintained by the Ofﬁce is most effective for analyzing large-scale expenditures 
with a statewide impact and does not allow for regional-speci ﬁc impacts. Neither 
does it allow for direct analysis of proposed tax changes. For those, a separate add- 
on model (Tax-PI) would have to be purchased and maintained. The PI+ model 
also operates off a baseline forecast developed by REMI. While some components 
of the forecast can be calibrated to match the forecast from the Consensus 
Economic Forecasting Commission, the Commission does not forecast every 
variable in the model (GDP, for example) and so the calibration is not exact. 
The typical turnaround time to model economic impacts for proposed 
revenue forecasting legislation can vary depending on several factors, such as the 
complexity of the proposed legislation, the availability and quality of data, and the 
sophistication of the economic impact model being used. In general, it can take 
several weeks to several months to produce an economic impact analysis for 
proposed legislation, especially if the analysis requires input from multiple
4
stakeholders or a review by outside experts. However, some simpler analyses may 
be produced in a shorter time frame. It's worth noting that the speed of the analysis 
should not come at the expense of accuracy or rigor. Accurate economic impact 
analysis requires careful consideration of assumptions and data inputs, and 
sufﬁcient time for review and reﬁnement. 
Much of the Work in an economic impact analysis is done up-front in the 
form of background research, identifying (and accessing) relevant data, and careful 
consideration of a variety of contextual issues developing the assumptions and 
inputs that go into the model runs. For example, the speciﬁc timing of impacts, the 
industries and income lines that would be affected, and the exact amounts that 
would impact these variables are just a few of the inputs needed. Despite best 
efforts, the inputs to the model may be incomplete or inaccurate, which can lead to 
errors and limitations in the resulting economic impact statement. Often, multiple 
iterations are needed where inputs are developed, the model is run, inputs are 
adjusted, the model is run again, and so on. This can be a very time-consuming 
process depending on the scope of the proposed change. The ﬁnal results then 
show the impact to the region as a whole in the projected time period going 
forward for a number of measures, such as population, GDP, employment by 
industry sector, components of personal income, earnings by sector, and 
government spending, to name a few. 
However, there are several items in the required statement list that are 
outside the scope of either the REMI PI+ or the Tax-PI model. In particular, items 
l (a determination of whether the legislation is the most cost-effective method for 
achieving the stated purpose), 2 (a determination of whether the legislation 
represents the most efﬁcient appropriation or allocation of public and private 
resources to achieve the stated purpose), and 7 (a determination of the effect of the
5
legislation on competition within the State, with other states and with regions, on 
the regulated community and on potential global competition) are not effects that 
would be captured by the results of the economic impact model. While economic 
impact analysis does provide information on jobs created, it would not identify 
which jobs would be enhanced, retained, impaired, or devalued.
