  
Written Testimony of Dr. Jeffrey Aalberg 
 
In Support of LD 1684 
 
An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine Residents by 
Expanding Coordinated Community Programming 
 
Submitted via Online Testimony Portal on May 1, 2023 
 
 
Greetings Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. On behalf of older adults in Southern 
Maine, I am testifying in support of LD 1684. 
 
My name is Jeff Aalberg and I am a family physician and currently the Medical 
Director of Day One. For 25 years I served as the primary physician for many 
patients, from young to old. I’ve held leadership positions at MaineHealth 
including CMO of the ACO and Senior Medical Director for Elder Care. I recently 
completed a decade-long tenure on the Board of Directors for Southern Maine 
Agency on Aging. 
 
I am passionate about helping community-based organizations ensure better 
cognitive, physical, and emotional health for our citizens especially those with 
age-related needs – the young and the elderly. Case management for older adults 
is lacking in our system today and I have seen firsthand how much having an 
Agency on Aging social worker, or case manager, on the healthcare “team” can 
lead to better health outcomes. 
 
Many Primary care docs support annual wellness visits and period check-ins on 
health. Although the office encounters are valuable, they can address only a 
fraction of the needs of many elderly citizens. Challenges persist with the aging 
population, including financial, transportation, rural living, food insecurity, health 
awareness and loneliness, to name a few. As we age, chronic conditions arise: 
diabetes, COPD, heart disease, dementia and poor mobility. Multiple medication 
management is difficult. There’s simply not enough time to address these 
individual-specific needs in a 1:1 provider check-up visit. It would be a 
tremendous benefit to be able to easily refer an individual to an Area Agency on 

Aging case management system, ensuring that an older adult will get access to 
the information, social and health services they need.  
 
While MaineHealth Director for Elder Care I worked with Southern Maine Agency 
on Aging on a grant funded care transitions pilot. While the model was focused  
on patients being discharged from the hospital, the core components were the 
same as in the case management bill before you today - an Agency on Aging case 
manager works with an older adult to develop a comprehensive care plan that 
addresses their individual needs. They coordinate services like medical 
appointments, transportation, home health care, and social services, among 
others. By working with a case manager, older adults can stay healthy and 
connected in their own communities.  
 
The pilot program worked. We were able to prevent hospitalizations and 
decrease the emergency room visits, which can be costly and disruptive for older 
adults and the healthcare system. The success was outlined in a peer-reviewed 
national publication. 
 
In addition, Southern Maine Agency on Aging and MaineHealth partnered on an 
Alzheimer’s grant. The grant demonstrated that, for individuals with mild to 
moderate dementia, a dedicated case manager ensured that each individual 
patient had their needs met.  
 
These examples strongly underscore how a basic, and accessible, case 
management and navigation service can be a critical part of the healthcare 
system. Such a system is vital to ensuring our elder citizens can access and receive 
the necessary care to maintain their health and well-being. And it saves money. 
 
Thank you for your consideration and support of LD 1684 today. 
 
