Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor   
 
 
May 1, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee o f Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1684- An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine Residents by Expanding Coordinated 
Community Programming  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services:  
 
This letter provides information regarding LD 1684  An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine 
Residents by Expanding Coordinated Community Programming . The Department is neither for nor against this 
bill. We do note that this would require a general fund appropriation outside the Governor’s  proposed budget.  
 
The State Unit on Aging within the Office of Aging & Disability Services (OADS) is responsible to lead in the 
development and implementation of a statewide comprehensive and coordinated community -based system in 
consultation with the five designated area agencies on aging  (AAAs) . The federal Older Americans Act 
currently provides limited funding for case management. State funding under the Priority Social Services 
Program  and local fund ing are also used to provide this service statewide . However, as Maine’s older  population 
grows so does the need for case management services.  The increased need for this service has been identified 
during listening sessions, stakeholder meetings, the previous needs assessment for the State Plan on Aging 
(2020 -2024)  and recent listening sessions of the Cabinet on Aging .   
 
With additional state funding, the five area agencies on aging would increase their capacity to meet the 
increasing demand for short -term case management services. As the State Unit on Aging, OADS would work 
with the area agencies to build capacity , standardize the service , and ensure that case management staff are 
trained in best practices to assist older adults navigat e services across the care continuum.   
 
We note that this request is for a different function than the $500,000  included in the Governor’s budget request. 
The Governor’s budget request is to strengthen the capacity of AAAs  to conduct information and referral 
services through their Aging and Disa bility Resource Centers. The case management funding requested in this 
bill would enable the AAAs to assign case managers to the more complex cases they receive and continue 
assisting  an individual for a longer period of time.   
 
We are happy to provide add itional information at the work session.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Paul Saucier,  Director  
Office of Aging and Disability Services  

