 
 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1684 “An Act to Invest in the Health and 
Wellness of Older Maine Residents by Expanding Coordinated 
Community Programming” 
Monday, May 1, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah Calder, Senior 
Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to support LD 1684, 
“An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine Residents by 
Expanding Coordinated Community Programming.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and New 
Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support our vision of 
“Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest in America” by 
providing a range of services from primary and specialty physician services to a 
continuum of behavioral health care services, community and tertiary hospital 
care, home health care and a lab. This bill aligns with the MaineHealth vision by 
supporting the aging network to expand these critical services in the community 
as outlined in the Older Americans Act.   
Additionally, this bill will provide short-term and ongoing funding to expand case 
management and navigation services available to older Mainers via the five area 
agencies on aging (AAA).  While the AAAs receive federal funding from the 
Older Americans Act to do some case management, persistent direct care 
workforce shortages, lack of affordable housing, and no adult care services in 
many parts of Maine means more Mainers need extensive help with increasingly 
complex situations that take considerable time and effort to solve.  This funding 
will allow AAAs to increase service delivery.    
Finally, the bill has the potential to increase access and improve care coordination 
between healthcare and community-based supportive services.   These services 
help older Mainers to remain securely housed and actively participating in their 
communities, and  improve health outcomes.  There are significant “care deserts” 
in Maine where people cannot find the home care or homemaker services they 
need – and even when services exist, a third of older Mainers cannot afford to pay 
out of pocket for these services. Helping older Mainers navigate through these 
challenges takes considerable time.  
 
MaineHealth provides care coordination services to its most vulnerable patients 
through our practice based Lend a Hand program.  This program is designed to 
better coordinate health system driven care management with the services offered 
by our partners in community-based organizations. The area agencies on aging are 
critical partners in our work with older adults. It is for that reason that we support 
the legislation before you today. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have.  
 
 
 
  
