  
 
Written Testimony of Sylvia Harkins, LSW 
 
In Support of LD 1684 - An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine 
Residents by Expanding Coordinated Community Programming  
 
Submitted via Testimony Portal on May 1, 2023  
 
 
Good morning,  Senator Baldacci , Representative M eyer, and members of the Committee  on 
Health and Human Services . 
 
My name is Sylvia Harkins,  and I am the Community Outreach Supervisor  at the  Southern 
Maine Agency on Aging . I have worke d with SMAA since 2005 .  On behalf of older adults in 
Southern Maine, I am testifying in support of LD 1684  today.  
 
- For over 17 years, I have worked directly with older adults  and those with disabilities 
connecting them with resources and benefits in their communities.   
- I have witnessed first -hand what an impact the work of my team makes.  
- I’d like to share a few scenarios of actual clients I have  recently  worked with and the barriers 
they have faced; highlighting how critical it is for many older adults to have a case manager 
at their side.  
 
 
Case # 1  
 
George, 68 years of age  with TBI (Traumatic Brain Injury)  
- Lost his apartment due to  the building being sold.  
- Lived in his vehicle/tent for summer into the fall.  
- Insulin dependent, medication  required refrigeration,  stored in cooler   
- George had a s mall dog  who lived with him  
- George contacted SMAA for assistance.  
  
Barriers : Documentation  required for housing application s: include copies of birth certificate, 
ID, Social Security card  and proof of income. George  had no access to  or knowledge of using the 

Internet  and was unable  to locate most documents due to homelessness. He did not have the 
ability to reach or communicate with the e ntities to acquire these documents.     
 
Outcome : Case  manager assisted  with applications, contacted necessary agencies to collect  
documents. George  moved into a subsidized apartment prior to the first snow fall. Had George 
not had assistance from case management he would have remained homeless.  
   
Case #2  
 
Evelyn,  in her  late 80’s, had mild  cognitive issues.  
  - Following a medical even t, she s pent several weeks in  a rehabilitation  facility  before 
returning  home.  
- Evelyn  had been  receiv ing Social Secu rity and Suppl emental Security Income . Upon discharge,  
she discovered her S upplem ental  Security Income  had been terminated . 
- Terrified she would not be able to pay her  rent and other  expenses . 
- Housing authority referred Evelyn to SMAA  
 
Barriers:  Due to mild cognitive issues Evelyn  was not able t o comprehend the letter  received 
from Social Security.  She was not aware of the rule that SSI is interrupted if a person is in a 
facility for more than 30 days .  
 
Outcome:  Case manager contacted SS with Evelyn  notifying  them she had returned home . Her 
SSI was reinstated,  and Evelyn  was able to pay her  bills and remain in her apartment .  
 
These are two examples of hundreds tha t my teammates and I  have wit nessed in my tenure  with 
Southern Maine A gency on Aging. There are indi viduals who could benefit from case 
manag ement  services today,  but there are not enough  resources to support all of the cli ents who 
so desperately need more help.  
 
Given the current housing crisis, the rapidly increasing cost of living, the needs of our clients, 
and the challenges we’re  experiencing here in Maine, the demand for case management services 
will only grow in the coming years.  
 
We appreciate your serious consideration of this bill on behalf of the needs of older adults in 
Maine.  Thank you for your continued support for our w ork! 
 
