EASTERN AREA 
AGENCY ON AGING
1 Testimony of Tabatha Caso, Executive Director, Eastern Area Agency on Aging 
In support of An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine Residents by 
Expanding Coordinated Community Programming (LD 1684) 
May 1, 2023 
Before the Committee on Health and Human Services 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services: 
My name is Tabatha Caso and I am the Executive Director of Eastern Area Agency on Aging 
(EAAA). EAAA was incorporated in 1973 and our mission is to provide older adults, caregivers, 
and adults with disabilities in Hancock, Penobscot, Piscataquis, and Washington counties with 
the information and access to resources they need to be healthy, engaged, and supported in their 
communities. 
Last year, EAAA’s Aging and Disability Resource Center assisted 14,239 older adults with 
information, assistance, and resources across our 13,000 square mile territory. We are grateful to 
receive Older American ’s Act funding to support our resource team of 4, however, it only allows 
for them to do a limited amount of case management. The resource team regularly reports the 
contacts are becoming more complex and the need is greater than they can provide within their 
full-time hours. To put in perspective how large our area is, our 4 counties have more square 
miles than all of Massachusetts and it takes about 3.5 hours for a staff member to drive from 
Greenville (Piscataquis County) to Eastport (Washington County). With the population 
significantly dispersed there are limited services, staffing shortages, transportation challenges, 
limited age-friendly housing options, and their informal supports could be miles away. 
ln addition to the large geographic area, several of our towns tend to be older than the statewide 
average. In Maine, 44% of the households have at least one-person age 60 or over. ln E8Sip0l'i 
(population 1,351), 63% of the households have at least one-person age 60 or over - with 37% of 
them living alone. In Millinocket (population 4,280), 60% of the households have at least one- 
person age 60 or over - with 41% of them living alone. Eastpoit and Millinocket are two 
examples of the many rural towns in our territory.
When consumers face these challenges, they need support from a trained individual to assess 
their situation and to arrange, secure, coordinate, and monitor the services to ensure their needs 
are met. When the resources are limited, it takes creativity and additional efforts to builda 
successful supportive plan. With EAAA’s current capacity, our resource team of 4 struggles to 
keep up with the volume of people calling with unmet needs, let alone have the ability to travel 
multiple hours to visit consumers. We are requesting funding to not only build the statewide 
infrastructure to ﬁll the gap of lack of case management services speciﬁc to older adults, but also 
to hire and train additional staff who live within these rural communities. Hiring qualiﬁed staff in 
rural communities will allow access to this support quicker, they will have a better understanding 
of the situation the older adult is in, and also have knowledge and relationships with both fonnal 
and informal services. A focus of this funding will also be regional outreach to educate the 
communities of the support and services available to them. 
This past winter we received a call from a 62-year-old Woman who lives in a rural town witha 
population of less than 3,000. She and her husband are retired farmers and only have social 
security beneﬁts as income. They live in a 200-year-old home that is not well insulated and they 
lost power which resulted in their pipes freezing. They have a woodstove, but it is a struggle for 
them to carry the firewood due to them both having mobility issues. They instead opted to tum 
on the burner on their gas stove to keep warm, which they admitted they knew was not the safest 
option but felt it was their only option. They did not have a diagnosis to qualify them for 
traditional Case Management services. They did not know what to do or where to start. Our staff 
member took the time to follow up with several resources and worked with the local LIHEAP 
agency to get them an online appointment for heating assistance and secured emergency 
assistance for the frozen pipes. Once the immediate need was met, through follow up 
conversations and questions, the staff member identified they were struggling with affording 
groceries due to the increased cost of food. She supported them in obtaining food beneﬁts, 
including the Commodity Supplemental Food Program. Once the issues were resolved, the 
consumer contacted the agency and said “If you are old and/or sick, and especially, in troubling 
times, you need to start somewhere. People need to survive. Thank you for all your help.” 
EAAA was able to make a difference for this couple, however, all of the Area Agencies on 
Aging have rural towns and similar situations. We cannot give this level of support across the 
state with nearly 400,000 Mainers age 60 or over. 
We all have an older adult in our lives, whether it is our coworker, parent, neighbor, or a friend. 
Please help us provide the best service and support these individuals deserve and need, by 
supporting LD 1684. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.

