S"n';";;<1§1 i‘~rts.z;\;t~t 
£3 0Fi~‘§(‘i~l 0:1 THE (§(}\'i~T.RZ\ZOR 
*7. 
G, lS’l" .~%'i‘i~i H{>r;~;i.~t S’t‘ .a"t:ox 
At‘ ~:;1's1"_x. M.»§i\‘€ 
64.333-Giiiii 
JA§\'¥:Z'¥ ‘ @111.-LS DAR‘ BFRCESS 
Govenxoa Dmsrfroa OF G()\’EiR.\’()R’S 
E.\‘ERG\' ()FFl('E 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine 
L.D. 780 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies neither for nor against L.D. 780. 
l appreciate the opportunity to comment on this legislation. Section 1 of L.D. 780 defines a ”solar-ready 
building" and requires new buildings 25,000 square feet or greater to reserve 40 percent of roof space 
for the future installation of a solar energy system. The GEO is interested in efforts to support the 
development of solar on rooftops as proposed here, in addition to on previously disturbed sites, as well 
as to promote new building design and construction that takes into consideration factors that may 
facilitate interconnection in the future. Cost-effective distributed generation developed in close 
proximity to load can reduce transmission and distribution needs while providing resiliency benefits toa 
building and its operations, among other benefits. 
There are several building design and technical considerations that can be leveraged during construction 
to ensure a building is well positioned to integrate a solar installation in the future. These considerations 
may include building orientation, shading, climate, roof design and warranty constraints, electrical 
system design preparations as well as local zoning and permitting requirements. Awareness of these 
considerations prior to and during construction would likely reduce barriers and costs to development 
later. Many of these factors will be site specific though, meaning the suitability of each rooftop for solar 
will vary. 
The GEO has a few questions regarding this provision though, and would like to better understand how 
a suitable solar-ready zone is to be determined, if specific electrical infrastructure is required, as well as 
the feasibility of reserving 40 percent of roof space on the identified building types. 
Regarding Section 2 of L.D. 780, the Commission currently has an open docket (No. 2022-00345) to 
gather input from interested parties on potential changes to Chapter 324 which establishes procedures 
and protocols for interconnection to transmission and distribution systems for small generators. lna 
prior docket, the Commission engaged the interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC) to evaluate 
Maine's interconnection processes for solar and storage projects in response to LD 1100, “An Act To 
Support the Continued Access to Solar Energy and Battery Storage by Maine Homes and Businesses. ” in 
doing so, lREC conducted an evaluation of the efficiency, cost, and transparency of the state's 
interconnection procedures and practices, and delivered a report containing its recommendations.
1
The GEO is closely monitoring Docket No. 2022-00345 and submitted comments in response to the 
Notice of lnquiry encouraging the Commission to make several rule changes in the upcoming 
rulemaking. Specifically, the GEO supports enhancing dispute resolution processes particularly for small 
and on-site interconnecting customers, adoption of a table-based screening approach for expedited 
interconnection applications, and adoption of IEEE 1547-2018 standards. Additionally, the GEO 
encourages the PUC to use this Chapter 324 inquiry to solicit speciﬁc interconnection related 
performance metrics, as required by P.L. 2021, Chapter 702 (LD 1959). We will remain engaged in these 
proceedings as they progress. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Cr-x»._C=e».\ 
Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
