cliffford Krolick
Parsonsfield
LD 1232
Testimony Speaking in favor of LD1232  
Dear Senators Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of EUT 
committee.
My Name is Clifford Krolick a resident of Parsonsfield, Maine.  I hold memberships 
in various organizations.  I have extensive experience and research with clean power 
and have been a very early adopter of solar electric.  Today I speak as a senior citizen 
and longtime supporter of truly clean and renewable energies.
The concept of LD 1232 is more than just expanding clean energy, It is a roadmap to 
provide climate friendly PV solar energy at affordable prices for all ratepayers.  And 
its success lies with projects connecting to a grid that will offer greater capacity. And 
of particular importance is the advancement of reliable interconnections and strong 
local distribution and generation. Thanks to new funding, mandates, and technology 
more distributed energy products than ever before could and should come online.
Lawrence Berkley Labs, performed a survey of tens of thousands of solar projects 
over a period of years.  It concluded that local Distributed Generation/roof top solar is
considerably cheaper than utility-provided solar which averaged about 14 cents higher
per kilowatt-hour then distributed, roof top solar.”
https://ilsr.medium.com/the-free-delivery-farce-in-solar-223e4f032c1  
Our transition to clean energy spirited by the governor’s enthusiastic efforts “Maine 
Will Not Wait” does not appear to have led to decreased electric rates or does it seem 
to support an equitable energy transition.  On the other hand, Distributed rooftop 
generation across the board will immediately provide price controls, equitability, and 
make Maine more climate resistant. Local roof top solar with Net Metering has a clear
track record considerably lowering consumer electric costs. 
According to Institute for Self- Reliance “All utilities should be required to do 
resource planning(coordinated with local commission approval) and such plans ought 
to include modeling distributed rooftop solar as a resource so we can accurately 
compare resource costs.”  ISLR.org
Long distance transmission of high voltage electricity costs appear to remain elusive 
as long as for profit driven fossil fuel companies, like CMP’s parent company, remain
in charge.  Larger megawatt investor owned solar or wind farms would not only be 
exposed to CMP’s higher transmission rates but will also be determined by their 
investor needs. 
I would like to see the EUT committee lead the way on responsible legislation that 
will direct the utility owners to NOT constrain our grid as more renewable PV is 
required, and at the same time should expect the utility to advance interconnection 
safety and reliability. 
At present I would like to let legislators know that Maine currently has the 6th highest
electric rates in the nation. And would like to remind legislators that presently the one
clear way to substantially, reduce electric rates across the board, and address climate 
resiliency is to advance local distributed -roof top solar generation.  
This paired with our Net Metering program that the legislature has endorsed, and 
providing subsidies, grants, and monies for small businesses and rate- payers through 
Efficiency Maine, would rapidly decrease consumers electric rates and meet the 
emissions goals of our state.  A program of this magnitude would also provide jobs 
for dozens of small solar businesses and literally create thousands of new jobs for 
local people,
.
