‘it 
.. STATE OF MAINE 
, PUBLlC UTILITIES COMMlSSiON 
Philip L. Bartlett, II Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither for Nor Against . 
LD 1232, An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine 
'i 
April 4, 2023' 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against section 2 of LD 1232, An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine on behalf of 
the Maine Public Utilities Commission (Commission). _ 
Section 2 of the Act mandates that the Commission amend its small generator ‘ interconnection rules 
(Chapter 324) to increase the capacity limit for the Level l screening criteria from 25 kW to 100 kW. As 
the Committee is aware, issues involving the operation of the grid and interconnections are extremely 
technical and are of utmost importance to ensure the safety, reliability, and power quality of the grid.1 
Thus, any mandates or required changes to the interconnection rules must be carefully considered. 
Consistent with other states and FERC rules, Maine’s interconnection rules contain several “levels” of 
interconnection requirements that depend on the size and operational characteristics of the proposed 
interconnecting generators. The Commission ’s interconnection rules contain four levels. The speciﬁc 
interconnection study procedures (referred to as “screensi ’) depend on which “level” the proposed 
generation project falls. The capacity limit and requirements for the rule’s four levels _ is as follows: 
I Level l: certiﬁed, inverter-based facilities have a power rating of 25 kW or less on Radial or 
Spot Network systems. _' 
I Level 2: certiﬁed generating facilities that do not qualify for Level 1; and have a power 
rating of 2MW or less. 
I Level 3: certiﬁed generating facilities that do not qualify for Level l or Level 2; havea 
power rating of IOMW or less; and do not export power to the T&D Distribution System. 
I Level 4: all generating facilities that do not qualify for Level l, Level 2 or Level 3. 
The Commission is unaware of any state that has a capacity limit of 100 kW for Level 1 projects. 
Currently, 25 kW is a common threshold for Level l projects. New York and Illinois have a higher 
capacity limit. New York generally allows projects up to 50 kW to interconnect without a formal 
screening process as long as they meet speciﬁed technical requirements. Illinois allows projects with an 
1 
For the Committee ’s reference, attached to this testimony is the Commission ’s current small generator 
interconnection rules (Chapter 324). 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony — LD 1232 April 4, 2023 
export capacity of up to 25 kW and a nameplate capacity of up to 50 kW to go through a Level l review 
(which includes 4 screens).L 
The actual screening process and the number of speciﬁed screens depends on the qualifying requirements 
(such as a capacity limit) for a particular Level. Thus, if the Commission is required to amend its 
interconnection rules to increase the Level 1 capacity limit, it would be extremely important for theL 
Commission to review the speciﬁc screening criteria that currents apply to Level 1 and make any 
necessary changes to avoid compromising the safety, reliability, and power quality of the grid. 
The Commission notes that the language in Section 2 of the Act does not explicitly prevent a review of 
the Level 1 screening criteria. However, the bill summary speciﬁes that the current Level 1 screening 
criteria and process be maintained. In the event the Committee proceeds with this bill, the Commission 
emphasizes that it should be clear that it retains the authority to apply its expertise in reviewing and 
possibly changing the screening criteria to address the impacts of larger projects and maintain the safety 
and power quality of the grid. 
Finally, the Commission notes that it is currently conducting a proceeding to obtain input and proposals 
from numerous interested persons for possible amendments to its interconnection rules? TheL 
Commission anticipates opening a formal rulemaking in the near future to consider changes to its_ 
interconnection rules. Thus, the Commission can consider changes to the screeninglevels and 
requirements in that process. 2 
LZ 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
2 Docket No. 2022-00345.
‘
2
