 
 
 
 
     
 
    
April 4, 2023 
 Hon. Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair Hon. Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333  Re: L.D. 1232/HP 780 An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine  Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, a nd members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee: 
 On behalf of the over 3,500 members of the Interna tional Institute of Building Enclosure Consultants 
(IIBEC), and especially our 13 members in Maine, IIBEC respectfully requests that you oppose this 
legislation in its current form and instead allow th e design professional, in cons ultation with the building 
owner, to decide if solar pane ls are appropriate for including in a new building’s roof design.  
 IIBEC members come from a diverse group of design and construction industry companies, including 
hundreds of engineering firms, architecture compan ies, consultants, contractors, and product 
manufacturers. Our members specialize in design, in vestigation, repair, and management of roofing, 
exterior wall, and waterproofing systems. IIBEC member s act as an advocate for the building on behalf of 
the owner or manager and ensures the building enclosure or roofing projects meet standards, codes, 
warranty requirements, and functionality required. IIB EC members are perfectly positioned to inform 
owners and managers about the benefits of includi ng solar when it comes to designing or retrofitting a 
building, however not all buildings will be a good candidate for solar energy generation.   
 
When designing a building enclosure for a structur e that will stand for decades, a designer will make 
hundreds of decisions to ensure the roof system pe rforms as intended. Informed decisions can only be 
made when evaluating the full range of environ mental, societal, and economic impacts. Through 
application of the principles of sustainability, designe rs will meet the customer’s expectations. However, 
arbitrary mandates, like the requirement included in th is bill, can negatively impact the design process.  
 
Solar Panels are not appropriate for every roof. 
While many commercial roofs are low slope (i.e., basi cally flat), their size will be as varied as the 
businesses they serve. Most building roof systems are composed of mu ltiple areas of differing sizes and 
shapes at different heights from the ground, some of which may shade other sections of the roof system 
during the daylight period, thus making a fixed solar panel inappropriate for that area. Nearby foliage can 
also shade roofs making them unsuitable for solar generation.   
 
Additionally, a building’s physical location may negativel y impact its suitability for solar generation.  For 
example, if a building is being constructed next to a taller building it is conceivable that the number of 

IIBEC Concerns with Maine Solar Ready Mandate ‐L.D. 1232/HP 780 ‐ page 2 
 
prime solar hours that roof would receive per day coul d be substantially reduced due to shading from the 
taller building.  
 Increasing risk for owners, building personnel, and first responders. 
Reducing emissions by incorporating solar energy gene ration into a project is a worthy goal, however, it 
is not without risk – risk that will be ultimately born by the building owner and those who must maintain 
the roof. The risk arises from the simple fact that el ectrical lines must be installed to power the units and 
carry the energy generated by each solar panel.      Electrical wires, receptacles, and connection boxes mu st be installed along with emergency power cut-off 
switches, also referred to as a solar safety disconnect switch. However, even when the power is cut to a 
solar panel, during daylight the cells  will generate power as they are d esigned to do and if the power is off 
it will be released as heat. When workers are on the roof, care must be made to not come into contact with 
power lines and equipment or materials must also be prevented from making contact with electrical lines, 
equipment, or the solar panels. A dditionally, solar ready areas can pose an electrification risk to workers 
moving around devices like a high-rise window cleaning pl atform, safety ropes and equipment, or when 
roof maintenance is being conducted in the area.     
 During calm weather, safety precautions will likely be very effective, but severe weather is when risk is at 
its highest for workers. Inspecting a roof after a severe weather event could include standing water and 
damaged power lines, if they were impacted during th e event, could electrify the water. A well-designed 
electrical system would minimize this risk; however , it is still a risk and must be accounted for in 
operating procedures.  
 During a fire or other emergency, first responders’ saf ety must also be taken into account. According to 
press reports of a 2013 incident in Delanco, New Jer sey, volunteer fire crews discovered the roof of a 
burning warehouse was covered in solar panels, which for ced them to change tactics. It took 29 hours to 
put out the flames at the Dietz & Watson warehouse, which was left gutted and smoldering in ruins. If 
there is concern with electrocution, then the emergenc y responder’s ability to directly combat fires will be 
lessened and will result in greater damage and overall losses.    Structural costs increase. 
Since Maine receives on average 50 to 70 inches of snow yearly, a roof designer might use dark colors to 
harness the building’s temperature in conjunction with so lar radiation to help melt the snow and speed its 
exodus from the roof. However, this design will not work  for a solar zone where snow could be expected 
to accumulate on and around the solar panel units a nd the shade from solar panels would impair melting. 
As we have seen with the extreme weather events across the United States this past winter, significant 
snowfall events can damage commercial roofs – causing some to fail. For this reason, the building’s roof 
must be built to withstand the additional weight of the solar units and potential snow accumulation, which 
will increase the cost of the building.      Incentives over mandates. 
The recently passed Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) could have included provisions similar to the arbitrary 
40% roof space mandate in the legi slation under review, but leadership in the White House and Congress 
determined that incentives would work  better than mandates. Incentives, if  constructed properly, generally 
work better than mandates. In the case of the IRA, ac cording to the Department of Energy, solar systems 
that are placed in service in 2022 or later and be gin construction before 2033 are eligible for a 30% 
investment tax credit or a 2.75 ¢/kWh PTC if they  meet labor requirements issued by the Treasury 
Department or are under 1 megawatt (MW) in si ze. The IRA includes numerous incentives that will 
encourage owners constructing or  renovating commercial buildings to reduce energy use by increasing 
efficiencies and improvements to the building enclosure a nd, in the case of the solar investment tax credit, 
decide to include solar as a component of building at the beginning of the process.    
IIBEC Concerns with Maine Solar Ready Mandate ‐L.D. 1232/HP 780 ‐ page 3 
 
I hope you are now aware of a few of the factors that must be considered when a building’s enclosure is 
being designed and that mandating an arbitrary amount of  space to be made solar-ready is not appropriate 
public policy. We urge you to allow the incentives incl uded in the IRA to work to achieve the goals of 
increasing solar usage rather than arbitrary mandates.  For these reasons, we would respectfully encourage 
the committee to vote, “ought  not to pass” on L.D. 1232. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Brian Pallasch, CAE 
CEO/EVP 
 
 
cc:  Senator Nicole Grohoski 
Senator Matthew Harrington  
Representative  Mark Babin 
Representative  James Boyle 
Representative  Larry Dunphy 
Representative  Steven Foster 
Representative  Valli Geiger 
Representative  Christopher  Kessler 
Representative  Reagan Paul 
Representative  Walter Runte 
Representative  Sophia Warren 
 
 

