April 4, 2023   
 
 
 
 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 nature.org/maine 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
 
RE: LD 1232 – An Act to Address Climate Change by Reducing Carbon Emissions from State Vehicles 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology, thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony in favor of LD1232, 
An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine. This bill is a critical step forward in promoting 
renewable energy and reducing our reliance on fossil fuels. 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to conserving the 
lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on-the-ground 
solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the private sector, and other 
partners. The Nature Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is 
the 12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We also work 
across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine to rebuild 
groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to address our changing climate. 
 
Solar power is an important part of our pathway to energy independence, and this bill's requirement for 
new buildings of at least 25,000 square feet to reserve 40% of applicable roof space for future 
installation of a solar energy system is a smart and sensible policy to help us achieve our renewable 
energy goals. By reserving space for solar panels, building owners can reduce the cost and hassle of 
future installation.  
 
The bill also requires Maine's Public Utilities Commission to amend its interconnection rules to allow 
small electric power generators of up to a 100-kilowatt power rating to interconnect to a transmission 
and distribution utility under the commission's current level 1 screening criteria and process. This is a 
positive step forward that will make it easier for small-scale solar generators to connect to the grid. This 
policy change will encourage the development of distributed energy resources, which can help increase 
Maine's energy resilience, lower energy costs, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
By adopting this bill, Maine can take a leadership role in promoting renewable energy and combating 
climate change. With the increasing evidence of climate change's devastating effects on our planet, 
Maine has the opportunity to set an example for other states by demonstrating a commitment to 
sustainability and renewable energy. Not only will this bill be beneficial for the environment, but it will 
also boost Maine's economy by creating jobs in the clean energy sector and reducing energy costs for 
individuals and businesses. 
 
We  urge you to support LD1232 and promote the development of solar energy in Maine. This is an 
important step forward in transitioning towards a more sustainable and resilient energy system that 
benefits both the environment and the economy. 
 
 
