 
 
 
April 4 , 2023  
Senator Mark Lawrence , Chair  
Representative Stanley  Paige Zeigler , Chair  
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Testimony  on LD 1232 , “An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine ” 
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology  Committee:  
 
ReVision Energy wishes to s ubmit written testimony in support of  LD 1232 . Founded  right here 
in Maine  in 2003, ReVision Energy is a local, employee owned , certified B Corp oratio n with over 
385 employee s across our five branches in  New Englan d, with 220 staff in Maine at our 
Montville and South Portland locations . Our mission is to lead our community in solving the  
environmental problems caused by fossil fuels while alleviating social injustice. Our vision is to 
see New England as thriving place  where our children, grandchildren, and future generations 
can enjoy a clean environment and just society . In 2022 alone, w e installed 10,000  kilowatts of 
residential solar and nearly 24 megawatts of commercial solar.  
 
We believe Section 1 of this bill, which focuses on solar -ready buildings, to be an effective step 
forward in advancing the state’s climate goals. We support this provision with the current square 
footage recommendation of 25,000 square feet, however, we urge the committee to consider 
the inclusion of small er buildings by reducing  that square footage threshold , and to even 
consider requiring all ne wly constructed buildings to be solar -ready.  We recommend this 
consideration for the following reasons:  
 
• First, o ur state —and this body —has codified ambitious climate targets with a goal of 
achieving net zero carbon emissions by 20 45. To meet these, we will need to build as 
much clean energy generation as we possibly can, and quite frankly , every new building 
should be powered by clean energy. We canno t afford to be adding new inputs of fossil 
fuel powered buildings into these equations.  
• Second, w hile eliminating a square footage threshold  may appear aggressive, ensuring  
rooftops  are solar -ready is a thoughtful  solution to address concerns regarding  land use 
pressure that are often associated with larger ground mounted solar. Making all 
buildings solar -ready is an opportunity  to site as much solar as we can  directly  on the 
built environment , while avoid ing poten tially costly retrofitting down the line.  A hundred 
years ago, we never would construct a new building without a chimne y, right? Let’s set 
our built environment up for the essential systems it will need  the years to come.     
• Third, this legislation would rarely , if ever,  increase construct ion costs . The assumption 
could be made that a rooftop would need to meet additional specs to be solar -ready  and 
thus material and construction  costs would increase, however  that is largely unt rue as 
the weight of solar panels is surpr isingly  low. On a pitched roo f where panels are 
mechanically attached, the uniform dead load of panels is t ypically less than three  
pounds per square foot (ps f) (about the weight of a layer of asphalt shingles) , and on a 
flat roof whe re an array is ballasted, the weight would be typically be around  five psf. For 
comparison, t he snow load we must design for here in Maine is typically  50-90 psf , and 
therefore it would be very rare that a solar design wou ld add structural requirements an d 
 
 
any corresponding costs.  Ultimately, the additionality  would be in renderings —
complet ing drawings to outline  reserved array area on a roof plan . 
• Finally,  large commercial const ruction (buildings over 25,000 square feet) makes up a 
relatively small part of new construction overall in our state (and thus a small fraction of 
energy use , too), so to ensure this legislation  meets its intent and  is assuredly impactful , 
we suggest applying the solar -ready requirement to all buildings.   
 
Lastly , when it comes to adding language around specific requirements for interconnection, we 
recommend looking to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)  for sample language. 
Appendix CB does in clude language regarding making buildings electrically interconnection -
ready ( for example, within CB 103.6, CB 10 3.8). 
 
Section 2  of the proposed bill addresses an important —and often overlooked —challenge  for the 
clean energy transition: small generator interconnection. While we appreciate the Sponsor’s 
work in calling attention to this issue, we are not convinced that the proposed change between 
level 1 and level 2 interconnections meaningfully addresses the issues being faced by small 
customers  with respect to interconn ection today.  
 
As practi tioners on the ground, project interconnection is no longer a theoretical problem, it is a 
reality for our business and our customers  and a critical  obstacle  to achieving the State’s clean 
energy goals . We support the effort to make  this process easier for all solar customers, large  
and small.  
 
The exorbitant  cost and unreasonable project delays  associated with  utility  interconnection for 
large scale  (2-5MW)  distributed generation  solar projects ha ve received a fair bit of attention  in 
the press, at the Legislature and at the Maine Public Utilities Commission (PUC) in the last 
several years . Unfortunately , we’re now witnessing the same issues impacting  individual 
home owners  and small businesses  owners  here in Maine who are trying to make an investment 
in their own renewable energy system to  offset the volatility and rising costs of fossil fuel  energy 
sources . Right now , ReVision Energy has several  dozen customers , both residential and small 
commercial , who are being denied the right to interconnect a solar system  because the utilities 
refuse  to follow the PUC ’s Chapter 324  interconnection  rules. Unlike large project developers  for 
whom utility barriers  may be just an unfortunate cost of doing business , these individual 
homeowners and small businesses can not afford to hire lawyers or lobbyists to advocate on 
their behalf on issues  that are highly technical and complex . Dispute resolution alone can cost 
nearly as much as  a small system  itself. The structural information and resource asymmetry 
between individual customers  and monopoly utilit ies, coupled with a lack of bandwidth and 
specialization at the  PUC  makes i t nearly impossible for individual customers —Mainers across 
the state —to find fair relief . The utility interconnection  system is clearly badly broken , 
inequitable  and need s both evaluation and improvement.   
 
Fortunately, as you know, the  PUC commission ed a report from  the Interstate Renewable 
Energy Council  (IREC ) regarding small project interconnection challenges  as a result of your 
passage of LD 1100, ‘An Act To Support the Continued Access to Solar Energy and Battery 
Storage by Maine Homes and Businesses’ in 2021.  LD 1100, which  prescribed this study , 
included a provision ( Sec. 1. 35 -A MRSA Subsection 3474, Subsection 3 , Section 2) mandating 
that ‘within six months of the effective date of this Act, the commission shall conduct a 
proceeding and issue an order relating to the near -term reforms identified in the evaluation 
conducted under this section ,” and even more, “Within one year of the effective date of this Act, 
the commission shall determine and adopt cost allocation methods for interco nnection studies 
and upgrades that ensure on -site solar energy generators  do not bear prohibitive costs ….” LD 
 
 
1100 was signed into law by the governor on June 17, 2021, h owever, to date,  nearly two years 
later,  neither time-bound provision has taken place . 
 
Rather than amending one part of one screen within the PUC’s Chapter 324  rules, w e ask this 
committee to revisit the thoughtful intentions you set forth and ultimately passed into law in LD 
1100 and build upon them  to ensure  action . We strongly sup port the two post-study 
requirements outlined above  and seek both  rule modernization (which has already been 
identified by IREC ) and enforcement mechanisms to ensure all customers are  receiving the 
same screening processes.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our perspective . We welcome further discussion, and we 
are available to address any questions you may have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Fortunat Mueller  
President, Co -Founder  
ReVision Energy  
207.221.6342  

