Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1232  
 
“An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar Power in Maine”  
 
April 4, 2023  
 
Patrick Strauch , Executive  Director  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, my name is Patrick Strauch  and I am here  on behalf of the Maine F orest 
Products Council to testify in opposition to LD 1232, “An Act to Increase Adoption of Solar 
Power in Maine.”  
 
As drafted, LD 1232 would mandate that all new construction of buildings 25,000 square feet or 
larger be solar -ready with a 40% or larger section of roof designated and reserved for solar 
installation. The bill would also direct the PUC to amend its rules for interconnection 
procedures of small generators to transmission and distribution facilities . Without addressing 
grid congestion issues  and making necessary investments , this provision could have serious 
impacts throughout Maine’s aging grid.  
 
The mandates included in this bill would come at a  tremendous cost for construction including 
engineering, building and maintenance, yet it provides no direct benefit to the company, municipality or individual saddled with the extra costs associated with these mandates. The 
Council questions how 40% of 25,000 square feet translates into energy savings or a payback 
period? Will this bill include a cost -benefit analysis?  
 
LD 1232 presents a whole host of questions. Would we be better off making investments in 
energy efficient structures vs. solar array infrastructure? There’s also the issue of storage 
buildings/warehouses that have no thermal and limited electrical demand, such as lumberyard warehouses. Will this mandate apply to them? What about facilities that want to utilize a land -
based option for their solar array, or facilities that are not in close proximity to the grid?  
 It seems that as drafted, LD 1232 creates more problems than solutions. Perhaps it would be 
more effective and appropriate to amend this bill to establish  an incentive program rather than 
advance the current form, which is a  costly  mandate with broad application, applying even in 
locations where solar is a bad match and not cost effective.  
 Roof top utilization needs to be an individual , case- by-case consideration that accounts for the 
many factors outlined in this testimony. For these reasons, the Maine Forest Products Council 
urges you to vote ‘Ought not to pass’ on LD 1232 . 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
