 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 27, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health  and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1091 - Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Review Its 
Rules Regarding Campgrounds in Order to Ensure Campground Health and Safety  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacc i, Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Health and Human Services 
Committee : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1091, Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Health  and Human Services to Review Its Rules Regarding Campgrounds in Order to Ensure 
Campground Health and Safety , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
LD 1091 , a resolve, directs the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS ) to review its 
current rules regarding campgrounds and report its findings to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services  by December 6, 2023 . 
 
The Maine CDC – Health Inspection Program (HIP) regulates campgrounds in accordance with 
10-144 C MR chapter  205 - Rules Relating to Campgrounds. These r ules relating to campgrounds 
are included in the Department’s Regulatory Agenda submitted for FY  2022 -2023  routine 
technical rule changes  and this work is currently underway with the plans  to soon propose  rule 
changes . The campground rules were last updated May 21, 2000. Updating the campground rules 
will provide clarity on rule requirements for licensees.  
 
The proposed bill requires review of the current campground definition and whether parking lots 
and other unlicensed facilities should continue to be regulated  as campgrounds . To be clear , 
parking lots , unless within the campground premises , are not in fact currently regulated by the 
HIP as campgrounds  (22 MRS §24911). In addition, the bill is not clear regarding the meaning of 
“other unlicensed facilities .” If a currently unlicensed facility was found to meet the campground 
definition,  (i.e. tent and recreational vehicle parks, wilderness recreation parks, agricultural fair 
 
1 22 MRS §2491 defines "Campground" to mean, in addition to the generally accepted definitions, camping areas, recreational 
vehicle parks, seashore resorts, lakes hore places, picnic and lunch grounds or other premises where tents, recreational vehicles, 
rental cabins and cottages are permitted on 5 or more sites for compensation or indirect compensation. "Campground" includes,  
but is not limited to, sites intended for recreational purposes rather than permanent residency. "Campground" does not include 
parking lots or areas where camping is not authorized. Subsection 3 states, ‘If a campground consists of 5 or more tents or 
recreational vehicles on a commercial lot, regardless of fees charged, it is presumed that the owner or renter of the lot is receiving 
compensation for the use of a campground. The owner or renter may rebut the presumption if the owner or renter presents a 
preponderance of evidence to the contrary. ’ 
 
 campgrounds, and temporary campgrounds ) that facility would be required to obtain a license  
under rule chapter 205 ; areas that are not designated for campers ’ use and areas  where camping 
is not authorized , are outside of  the HIP’s oversight.   
 
In summary, the Maine CDC supports the review outlined in this bill and respectfully 
recommends this bill  ought to pass. The Maine CDC supports reviewing the current campground 
rules for needed updates and  to provide clarity on certain rule requirements for licensees.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

