 
21397761_4   
 
 
 
 
LD 210, An Act to Expand the List of Persons Exempt from the Real Estate Tax 
 
February 7, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joi nt Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is 
Stephen Gorden and  in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, 
I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Mai ne County Commissioners 
Association . We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee neither for nor against LD 
210. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta , represents all of Maine’s 16 counties , and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county .  
 
Discussion.  Maine law currently exempts deeds between spouses, parent and child, or grandparent and 
grandchild from the real estate transfer tax. Under LD 210, siblings , stepchildren , and stepgrandchildren  would 
be added to this list and would exempt deeds between such family members from the real estate  transfer tax. We 
write to note the financial  impact that this bill would have on the State and counties. Specifically, the State and 
counties split revenue from the real estate  transfer tax 90/10, so both the State and counties across Maine would 
lose revenue as a result of LD 210. Again, we write to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 210 but to 
simply note this fact for the Committee. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to pr ovide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional informat ion, please do not hesitate to let  us know.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Stephen Gorden  
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legisl ative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2  Augusta, ME 04330 , 207-623-4697  
www.mainecounties.org  
 
