	
	
							Maine	Mayors	Coalition		Testimony	Neither	For	Nor	Against	LD	1540	An	Act	to	Create	the	Stable	Home	Fund	Program		Senator	Pierce,	Representative	Gere	and	distinguished	members	of	the	Joint	Select	Committee	on	Housing,	the	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	submits	testimony	Neither	For	Nor	Against	LD	1540,	An	Act	to	Create	the	Stable	Home	Fund	Program.			The	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	is	a	nonpartisan	group	representing	the	mayors	of	ten	Maine	communities	–	Auburn,	Augusta,	Biddeford,	Lewiston,	Portland,	Rockland,	Saco,	Sanford,	South	Portland	and	Westbrook	–	and	more	than	260,000	residents.	The	Coalition	advocates	on	behalf	of	our	citizens	and	municipalities	for	policies	that	recognize	the	vital	services	Maine	cities	provide	and	the	positive	impact	Maine	cities	have	on	our	state.	The	Coalition	seeks	to	work	in	partnership	with	state	and	federal	elected	officials	to	meet	the	needs	of	Maine	people.			Maine’s	housing	crisis	directly	impacts	each	of	our	cities,	and	housing	is	top	of	mind	for	all	of	us.	Every	day	we	see	the	human	and	economic	consequences	that	come	from	the	lack	of	housing	supply	and	the	rising	costs	of	homes	and	rents.			Our	cities	are	working	to	find	ways	we	can	help	preserve	existing	affordable	housing	and	develop	new	affordable	housing.	Both	are	critical	for	our	cities	–	and	our	state	–	to	thrive.	In	our	capacity	as	mayors,	we’re	engaging	with	community	members	and	partners	to	foster	ideas	and	advance	solutions	at	the	local	level.			As	you’re	well	aware,	the	rental	market,	like	the	housing	market,	remains	tight,	making	it	difficult	for	many	to	afford	our	cities’	rental	units.	We	appreciate	the	funds	allocated	for	rental	payments	in	the	current	biennial	budget	as	well	as	more	recently	in	LD	3.	The	$21	million	from	LD	3	provided	many	individuals	and	families	with	emergency	rental	relief	during	our	cold	winter	months.	With	emergency	rental	assistance	ending,	many	people	will	still	not	be	able	to	pay	their	rents.			Establishing	a	rental	assistance	program	to	provide	short	term	financial	support	would	be	helpful	to	many	of	our	residents	who	must	often	make	difficult	decisions	for	themselves	and	their	families.	We	would	appreciate	your	consideration	of	a	program,	such	as	the	one	proposed	in	LD	1540,	that	would	allow	those	who	meet	eligibility	requirements	to	remain	in	their	homes	and	avoid	the	daunting	prospect	of	eviction	and/or	relocation.			We	appreciate	that,	like	us,	you	are	faced	with	a	multitude	of	funding	requests	and	must	make	difficult	decisions	on	behalf	of	Maine	citizens.	We	thank	you	for	the	opportunity	to	provide	this	written	testimony	and	for	your	continuing	work	on	this	very	important	issue.		
