      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 21, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1540, An Act to Create the Stable Home Fund Program    
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my 
name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine or CHOM , 
which owns and manages 88 properties, all of which include  supportive housing, serving more than 
1100 people .  One third of the people CHOM serves came directly from homelessness.  I serve on  
the Statewide Homeless Council and also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee  and the 
Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors .  
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 1540, An Act to Create the Stable Home Fund Program .  
This bill would create the Stable Home Fund and the Stable Home Fund Program within MaineHousing. This program would provide people earning up to 60%  of the median income with 
$300 per month in rental assistance paid directly to the landlord for up to 24 months or until those 
persons secure housing by means of a housing voucher program administered by HUD or secure a subsidized housing unit.   
 
As this  Committee knows, Maine has a shortage of Section 8 and other forms of rental assistance.  
There are some 12,000 vouchers and our waiting lists have been as high as 26,000 people, with 
some waiting for up to 10 years.  One of the missing links is a true tw o-year rental assistance 
program – a rarity in Maine .  LD 1540, along with other bills being heard by this Committee this 
Session, would establish more.   
 
Most families are circumstantially homeless; they fall behind on rent because they simply can’t 
afford their rent.  Rental assistance solves that with great efficacy .  Two years  of rental assistance is 
usually sufficient to pull someone out of homelessness and allow a prolonged period of stability 
after which people successfully remain permanently housed.  For those that need longer -term 
financial assistance to retain stable housing, two -year financial assistance bridges the gap until a 
permanent rental subsidy such as Section 8 can be attained.   
 
Creating the Stable Home Fund Program would allow Maine to stabilize a large number of people, moving them out of homelessness and into stability.  No one does better without housing; e veryone 
does better with housing.  
 
General Assistance serves as a default housing program, and it is a very inefficient and 
cumbersome approach –  for both tenants and landlords .  Establishing the Stable Home Fund 
Program would create a more efficient and effective path for exiting homelessness and ultimately 
poverty.   
 
The number of encampments in the Portland area is at historically high numbers.  The Portland 
Parks and Recreation Department is reporting 102 encampments just on city parks land as of 4/10.  
Based on outreach provider caseloads and staff knowledge, t here are likely 175- 225 people 
currently unsheltered in the  greater Portland area  alone .  Bangor is down to 43 people outside from 
a high of 170, and this is still unprecedented. Communities throughout Maine are experiencing the same drastic increase in unsheltered homelessness and encampments.  This  situation is only likely 
to worsen  as weather improves and hotel and warming shelter funding ends at the end of April.  
Establishing the Stable Home Fund and an effective, efficient two- year rental assistance program 
would greatly assist with this dire situation as well.  
 
Please support LD 1540, as e stablishing the  Stable Home Fund could help Maine address  this crisis 
as the state lacks sufficient affordable housing and rental assistance for those who depend on it to 
end their homelessness.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
