Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing; 
Please accept my testimony in support of LD154O The Act to Create the Stable Home Fund 
providing families with 300$ a month with rental assistance for 24 months. 
l have learned countless things in my last year working for Quality Housing Coalition, although 
one of the most jarring is how quickly a stable home can fall apart with the right conditions. 
One of my clients is a single mom living in Lewiston with her four kids. Before the pandemic, she 
had never required any form of subsidy or rental assistance, and was able to fully cover the cost 
of rent in her South Portland apartment and all other living expenses as a single-parent 
household. After the start of COVID, she lost herjob- and everything spiraled from there. 
She eventually lost her apartment and spent the summer with four children living out of her car. 
She was housed through QHC in 2022 in Lewiston. Over the course of the ﬁrst sixth months she 
developed a network of wonderful case workers, school employees, and well as varied support 
from DHHS, mostly attempting to navigate the countless services she was suddenly eligible for. 
By the time l started working with her, her only source of income was 1,004$ a month through 
TANF. Her rent was 1550 a month. She was unable to ﬁnd work as she had to provide full-time 
childcare and drive her children to South Portland every day so that they could gain access to 
the services they needed. She had missed the deadline to apply for McKinney Vento 
transportation assistance by one day. Leading up to the end of every month was a struggle for 
case managers, and obviously her most of all to try and find a solution of how to stretch that 
TANF money to include rent, diapers, food, and other household necessities. ‘We spend many 
hours on the phone, where my only option as a housing navigator was to recommend that she 
submit the entirety of her TANF to rent on the 1st of the month and wait for General Assistance 
to provide the rest, as well as food stamps for other necessities. She spend months partially 
paying her rent, narrowly avoiding eviction due to the help of loved ones providing what support 
they could, whether partial payments of support for childcare. 
She is now in a much better place. She has begun working in Portland again, and although it's 
an impressive drive to make every morning- she can drop the kids off and then go to work. 
Making enough to cover a 5 person household is always a challenge, but leaving March without 
an eviction notice was cause for celebration. 
lt was heartbreaking how quickly an unstable situation became a massive threat (and for a time 
loss) to their housing. She was in shock, repeating over and over that until that year, she had 
never required any assistance with rent, and had always been able to provide independetnyl for 
her kids and herself. The emotional toll of her situation was evident.
Bills like this are desperately needed in the sphere of housing in Maine. My client is deﬁnitely 
not alone. Thousand of families face the same struggle, and dread the 29th and the 30th of the 
month. $300 a month may not seem like a life-changing amount of money, but as the cost of 
living grows more and more expensive, this could easility be the difference between remaining 
housed and living from your car, or being able to buy diapers for you children. 
Grier Burgoon Miskell 
Housing Navigator at Quality Housing Coalition
