 TESTIMONY     OF     THE     WESTBROOK     COMMUNITY     HOUSING     COALITION 
 SUPPORTING     LD     1540:     An     Act     to     Create     the     Stable     Home     Fund     Program 
 Sponsor:  Representative     Rebecca     Millett     of     Cape     Elizabeth 
 Public     Hearing:  Friday,     April     21     at     9:00am 
 Dear     Members     of     the     Joint     Select     Committee     on     Housing, 
 I     am     Liz     Eisele     McLellan,     one     of     the     co-chairs     of     the     Westbrook     Community     Housing     Coalition. 
 We     are     a  group     of     community     members,     faith     leaders,     school     and     city     representatives,     and 
 nonprofit     organizations  that  have     been     working     together     to     address     the     housing     crisis     within 
 Westbrook. 
 One     of     the     biggest     challenges     that     we     are     seeing     in     our     community     is     the     ability     to     afford     the 
 rents     for     existing     or     available     housing.     Families     that     are     currently     housed     are     struggling     to     pay 
 their     rent.     We’ve     seen     rent     prices     increase     beyond     what     low-income     earners     can     reasonably 
 afford     to     pay.     With     the     loss     of     ERA     funding,     renters     that     were     using     that     money     to     fill     the     gap 
 between     what     they     could     afford     and     what     they     could     find,     are     facing     eviction. 
 The     fear     is     palpable.     Many     of     our     residents     are     constantly     afraid     that     they     are     one     rent     check 
 away     from     becoming     unhoused. 
 The     Westbrook     School     system     is     seeing     unhoused     families     becoming     housed     only     because 
 other     families     are     losing     their     housing.     This     is     not     a     sustainable     path     forward     out     of     the     housing 
 crisis. 
 Addressing     the     housing     crisis     will     take     many     different     approaches     and     efforts,     and     the     Stable 
 Home     Fund     is     one     of     those     many     efforts     that     will     have     a     positive     impact     on     some     of     our     most 
 vulnerable     neighbors,     and     their     children. 
 We     must     do     what     we     can     to     work     with     renters     and     landlords     to     keep     people     in     their     homes.     This 
 is     not     a     “work     harder,     you     can     pull     yourself     up     by     your     bootstraps”     issue.     This     is     a     culmination     of 
 inequity     in     housing,     employment,     and     wages,     that     we     have     failed     to     address. 
 Helping     people     stay     in     their     homes,     or     move     into     a     home,     provides     one     of     life's     most     basic 
 necessities.     Feeling     safe     is     important.     LD     1540     and     the     Stable     Home     Fund     is     just     one     way     that 
 you     can     help     provide     that. 
 Thank     you. 
 Liz     Eisele     McLellan, 
 on     behalf     of     the     Westbrook     Community     Housing     Coalition 
