 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION  (MIRC)  
SUPPORTING L.D.  1540: An Act to Create the Stable Home Fund Program  
Sponsor:  Representative Rebecca Millett of Cape Eli zabeth  
Public Hearing: Friday, April 21 at 9:00am  
 
Dear Members of the Joint Select Committee on  Housing : 
 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ 
Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network  of almost 100 member organizations  working to 
enha nce the lives of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advanc e systemic change s 
in Maine through collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and 
growing immigrant communities are heard.  
As this committee has heard throughout this year ’s legislative session so far, Maine has a n 
ongoing housing crisis . As the bill language says, o ver 40% of Maine renters are spending more 
than 30%  of their income on rent . Not surprisingly, to quote the bill again, “the months of 
January and February in 2023 saw more eviction filings for 12 renters than the previous 10 
years .” As federal Emergency Rental Assistance fu nds run out, the crisis shows no signs of 
slowing down.  
A Stable Home Fund program  would help both renters and landlord s, as it will provide rental 
assistance from low-income exist ing tenants  directly to landlords.  With evictions at record levels , 
anything that would help at-risk families and indivi duals is a welcome development.   
One of the communities that MIRC works with on a daily basis are asylum seekers , and we feel 
this legislation could be  quite beneficial for them. As they receive their legal work authorization 
months after being here  due to federal immigration laws, the y often face an income gap as they 
move from receiving General Assistance to obtaining hourly or salary wages at their new places 
of em ployment. The Quality Housing Coalition ’s Project HOME team has found $300 is the 
approximate difference between affordable and unaffordable rent  for its clients, so we are 
hopeful this assistan ce will be sufficient to keep people from losing their home s.  
Thank you  very much  for your con sideration of this urgent issue.  
 
### 
