 
 
 
To: Senator Brenner  
Representative Gramlich  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
From:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
Re: Statement neither for nor against  LD 1845 , An Act to Regulate Outdoor Lighting  
Date:  May 8, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, please accept this statement regarding  LD 1845, An Act to 
Regulate Outdoor Lighting.  
 
It is the opinion of our General Counsel’s o ffice that this bill would apply to MCCS and our campuses.  
However, t he Maine Community College System is not taking a position on this bill.  We would like to 
note that if th is bill moves forward , we anticipate a  financial  impact on our colleges  althou gh the costs 
have yet to be d etermined . 
 
In preparation for this hearing, we surveyed each of our campuses to determine if they would be 
impacted by these new regulations and prohibitions.   
 
As you likely know, we illuminate our campuses to assure the safety of our students  and staff  as they 
walk from their residence halls, classe s and cars.  We feel very strongly that the safety of our students 
comes first  and well-lit campuses are instrumental in our security plans .  Having said that, we do not 
believe that the regulations and prohibitions in this bill will impact our ability to light our campuses.  
Most of the lights on our campuses already meet these requirements.  We wou ld, however need to 
replace some lighting on a very compressed timeline.  
 
We do still have  lighting fixtures outfitted with mercury vapor bulbs.  However, it was already our intent 
to upgrade those li are to LED bulbs when they were du e to be replaced.  Similarly, most of our lights are 
shielded and pointed down.  We do have a few where the shields are either not effective, or the lights are 
not shielded.  Again, we plan to upgrade these lights when resources allow.   
 
As always, we appreciate the ability to replace equipment on our campuses on our own timeline —rather 
than dispo se of working light fixtures  and incur  a cost not currently  accounted for in  our budgets for 
next fall .  
 
Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
