Dirk Gouwens – Executive Director  
Ski Maine Association,  PO Box 689, Farmington, ME  04938  
www.skimaine.com   (207) 773-SNOW (7669  (o)  (207) 653- 5590 (mobile)  
       
      
      
      
      
      
       
 
May 5, 2023  
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE J OING STANDING COMMITTE E ON ENVIRONMENT AND 
NATURAL RESOURSES IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1845  
An Act to Regulate Outdoor Lighting  
 Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and member s of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources.  My name is Dirk Gouwens and I am the 
Executive Director of the Ski Maine Association and I live in New Portland, M aine.  
Ski areas in Maine have an annual economic impact  of nearly $500 million and they 
employ roughly 5000 Maine workers each year .  They are the backbone of their rural 
communities. Two of our ski areas are the second largest employers in their county . 
The bill before you would have a  devastating  effect on a large number of our ski areas who 
depend upon night skiing as a major source of income.  One of our ski areas has the most 
available night skiing in all of New England.  Many of our ski areas do not open for 
business until the afternoon so they can stay open late at night when people get out of work and students are released from schools.  
Ski areas have very sp ecific rules on how to apply lighting to ski slopes.  This is clearly 
outlined in ANSI/IES RP- 6-20.  There are specific guidelines for the amount of available 
Lux, longitudinal spacing and  the need to aim luminair es in a way that minim ize white -out 
and glare and in some case s create shadows for increased awareness of terrain vari ations 
and in other cases decrease shadows to assist with visibility.  
The requirements of this bill would not allow ski areas to follow established AN SI 
guidelines as it  requires all lighting to be “ Shielded” . 
1.F “Shielded”  means , with respect to an outdoor lighting fixture, that a shield or other 
device has been placed on the fixture that ensures that light emitted from the fixture is projected below a horizontal plane running through a point immediately above the emitting light, as specified by the department by rule.  
Ski areas need t o align luminaries so that they provide the best possible visibility at night 
for skiers which in almost all cases requires the lighting to be aimed at angles to the ski 
slope to meet the requirement s of ANSI/IES RP -6-20.  They cannot be “ Shiel ded”. 
In addition, ski areas with night lighting utilize these lights for the health and safety of its employees even after skiing has shut down for the night.  Ski areas have  full crew of 
employees who work overnight  preparing the s lopes for the next day ’s guests.  This 

requires grooming with large, potentially dangerous machinery and also making snow.  
The process of making snow can be extremely dangerous.  Snowmakers  work in extreme 
cold on slippery s urfaces  with large , complicated machinery  that requires connections to 
air and water under extremely high pressure.  Doing all this in the dark makes th e process 
even more dangerous.  
I urge you to vot e “Ought Not To Pass ” on this bill so we can continue to have a safe and 
robust ski industry in the state of Maine.  
 
Items from ANSI/IES RP -6-20 specific to lighting of ski slopes.  
 
 
   

