 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
May 8, 2023 
 
Testimony of Erin Courtney, Maine Turnpike Authority 
Before the 131st Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
 
Neither For Nor Against LD 1845  
An Act to Regulate Outdoor Lighting 
 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Erin Courtney and I am the Public 
Outreach Manager and Legislative Liaison for the Maine Turnpike Authority (MTA).  Maine Turnpike 
Authority is testifying today on LD 1845 as neither for nor against. 
 
We understand the intentions the sponsor had when submitting this but legislation but we have 
three main concerns with the bill as currently drafted.  
 
Highway Lighting: While MTA currently has an exemption from subsection 2 of the bill, it is only 
for outdoor lighting fixtures used to illuminate signs on the Maine Turnpike.  It is not clear that highway 
lighting is not exempted from this.  The intro to Section 3131 says that this bill is not designed to “limit” 
23 MRSA 709, which sets out standards for MaineDOT highway lighting.   The use of the word “limit” 
here, rather than a word like “alter” seems that the bill does not intend to lessen any of the current 
highway lighting requirements, but it nevertheless might add more.  Also, MTA is not subject to 23 
MRSA 709, so we believe what we would need is a clear exception for highway lighting, which could 
be added to the sentence that exempts highway sign lighting. 
 
Up-lighting: It is unclear whether this bill permits any “up-lighting” at all as would be necessary to 
illuminate a flagpole at night. Would up-lighting of a flagpole at night be allowed if it requires more than 
150 watts to do so?  
 
Shielding Requirements for LED Lights: Does the shielding requirement for lighting that is more 
than 150 watts of Incandescent light and or 70 or more watts of “any other” (i.e. LED) include existing 
installations or is it only for new installs?  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to share our questions and concerns with the committee and we 
look forward to working with you during your deliberations.  I would be happy to answer any questions 
you may have at this time. 
 
 
