 19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622-7501 • Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORSâ   12781773.1 
 Testimony in Opposition to LD 1845 (“An Act to Regulate Outdoor Lighting”)  J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 8, 2023  Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® is opposed to LD 1845. The bill would, in the absence of applicable municipal ordinances of the same or greater restrictions, prohibit the use of outdoor lighting fixtures that are unshielded or use mercury vapor lamps.  We oppose this bill because it would unnecessarily restrict, and potentially take away, a property owner’s ability to use their property in a manner that they choose without harming the use for others. Moreover, the bill is a usurping of local control because it would force specific restrictions on towns that have already considered how they want to regulate outdoor lighting and passed ordinances based on their local democratic process.   For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1845. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
