2% 
Maine Conservation Voters 
In/iirm. Hate. Protcrt. 
Testimony of Kelt Wilska, Energy Justice Manager, Maine Conservation Voters 
Before the Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee 
In Support of LD 1986 
An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and 
Energy Storage Systems 
May 24, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee. My name is Kelt Wilska and I am the Energy 
Justice Manager at Maine Conservation Voters, a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to protecting 
Maine’s environment, democracy, and climate future. Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
today in support of LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and 
Energy Storage Systems. ~ 
In February of this year, Governor Mills advanced Maine’s goal of 100% clean energy from 2050 
to 2040, a nod to the commendable progress we have made as a state and the speed at which we 
can achieve a just clean energy transition when we work together and create strong, responsible 
policy. We ﬁnd ourselves today at a policy juncture, where we can move forward with a bill that 
builds on the thoughtful recommendations of a stakeholder-driven process and fosters an 
environment where we can continue to accelerate our climate progress, or move backwards with 
a bill that will repeal the painstaking work we have done and stymie our climate progress. 
LD 1986 builds on the recommendations of the DG 2.0 Stakeholder Group, a group of state 
government, industry, and nonproﬁt representatives that met consistently for over a year to 
conceptualize a successor to the state’s current net energy billing (NEB) program, which expires 
in 2024. This is policy done right - keeping the parts that work while tweaking the parts that 
need improvement and applying these changes prospectively into the future. We cannot aiford 
the alternative, which would dismantle the NEB program and retroactively imperil pre-existing 
solar contracts, undermining projects that collectively are critical to the state successfully 
meeting its clean energy targets. 
A thoughtfully developed community solar program will bring us closer to a 100% clean energy 
future and lessen our reliance on the volatile fossil fuel market that is the true culprit behind 
spiking electricity rates. Further, also following on the recommendations of the DG 2.0
Stakeholder Group, LD 1986 leverages federal funds to implement cost-effective solar facilities 
for low- to-moderate income Mainers. An estimate from the solar industry projects that a $300 
million dollar grant from the federal government would generate a 20% bill discount for ll5,000 
low- to moderate-income Mainers, the equivalent of $857 million dollars in energy savings. 
LD l986 represents a responsible and affordable step forward in Maine’s clean energy transition, 
not a step backward that will jeopardize the diligent progress We have made as a state. For this 
reason, Maine Conservation Voters urges you to support this bill. Thank you for your time.
