REVISION ENERGY 
May 24, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Stanley Paige Zeigler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: Testimony on LD 1986, “An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee: 
Founded right here in Maine twenty years ago, Revision Energy is a local, employee owned, certified B Corporation solar 
construction company with over 385 employees across our ﬁve branches in New England, with 220 staff in Maine at our 
Montville and South Portland locations. Our mission is to make life better by building ourjust and equitable electric future. 
In 2022 alone, we installed 10,000 kilowatts of residential solar and nearly 24 megawatts of commercial solar across the 
region. 
We believe that an effective distributed generation program is critical in reaching our state’s climate commitments and 
renewable portfolio standard law, and therefore we are here today in support of LD 1986. 
Over the past few months, we have been frustrated by the inaccurate claims regarding the costs of our state’s Net Energy 
Billing (NEB) program that have been increasingly covered in the press and discussed within this body. While we are 
empathetic to Mainers' current concerns regarding rising electricity costs, we believe that the anticipated future costs have 
been grossly exaggerated. However, we share the concern regarding the importance of protecting low-income ratepayers, 
and we believe that there are thoughtful, data-driven policy solutions that we can implement right here, right now, to avoid 
potential impacts. 
The claims regarding anticipated high costs of community solar ignore the tangible and proven quantifiable benefits of 
distributed generation, and we believe the $220 million number is grossly inflated for multiple reasons. First, these 
numbers do not include tangible, quantifiable benefits to all ratepayers that repeated independent studies (Daymark, 
2021, and Synapse/SEA, 2022) identify. in addition to the lack of accounting for benefits in rate design, utilities are also 
reporting lost revenue due to increased distributed generation as a cost that must be recovered from ratepayers. This is 
quite simply bad math, and points to the fact that these estimates are based on unsubstantiated, unapproved utility filings. 
Even more, there are signiﬁcant questions regarding the anticipated project attrition rates used and cost estimates for 
projects in 2025 and 2026 when the program ends in 2024. Needless to say, we believe it is critical we make 
programmatic decisions based on real, economic data and not parrot utility filings that have yet to be critically scrutinized 
and/or approved by the body created to do so. 
We believe, however, that we can improve Maine's solar policies to ensure low-income ratepayers are not harmed, and as 
a developer, we are happy to come to the table to advocate for thoughtful changes to ensure the Commercial & Industrial 
Tariff Program within NEB provides net benefits to all ratepayers as the Kilowatt Hour Credit Program does, per Daymark. 
Lowering costs and increasing benefits of this program is surely a shared goal of all parties. We believe that the NEB 
program can, in fact, be part of the solution, and we can fix concerns regarding regressive rates without retroactive 
changes. And fortunately, we have the solutions at our fingertips, with this legislation. We can enact policy solutions today 
that have already been developed by a diverse stakeholder group—the DG 2.0 Working Group assembled and led by the 
Governors Energy Office in 2022 at the legislature ’s direction via LD 936. 
Ultimately, the DG 2.0 Stakeholder Working Group—which ReVision Energy participated in—recommended moving toa 
program that would, according to economic analysis per Synapse/SEA, provide significant net benefits to all utility 
customers and affirmative benefits to low-income Mainers. We are supporters of the implementation of these 
recommendations to develop a competitive procurement program with 70% of the annual capacity reserved via auction 
and awarded via power purchase agreements, and reserving a portion of resulting revenue as a financial benefit to low- 
and moderate-income ratepayers, and reserving 30% of the annual program target for public entities including 
municipalities, tribes, schools, and state agencies. 
AN EMPLOYEE —OWNED SOLAR COMPANY - BASED lN ME, MA 8NH
REVISION ENERGY 
Over the past few months, ReVision customers, co-owners, and partners have repeatedly asked us: what is the solution 
to addressing the concerns about rising program costs? We have answered that with five points: 
1. implement the DG 2.0 Working Group recommendations for a competitive procurement program that reserves 
capacity for public entities and resen/es revenue to utilize to directly support low- and moderate-income 
ratepayers. Independent economic analysis (Synapse/SEA) tells us this addresses the concerns at hand by 
providing net benefits to all ratepayers. If possible, ensure there is a lane for community owned solar projects that 
address local load. 
2. Maintain the status quo program within NEB for projects smaller than 1 MW in size or collocated with load. The 
Kilowatt Hour Credit Program, per independent economic analysis (Daymark) is already providing net benefits to 
all ratepayers. 
3. Ensure in all future programmatic decisions that we have an accurate picture of true program costs and benefits, 
ensuring real, tangible economic and environmental benefits are attributed to ratepayers including reduced 
electricity supply and demand prices, grid upgrades, and the potential monetization of the capacity value of solar. 
4. Ensure the current Commercial & Industrial Tariff program is implemented in a manner that maximizes benefits to 
all ratepayers. Independent economic analysis (Daymark) suggests that settling excess power on the wholesale 
spot market rather than via load reduction is resulting in a net cost to ratepayers, and we have the opportunity to 
correct that in implementation. 
5. Ensure a future NEB program can easily accept federal funding per the Inflation Reduction Act such as from the 
Environmental Protection Agency's Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund that can provide considerable funding for 
increasing distributed generation to beneﬁt low-income ratepayers.‘ 
To our excitement, nearly all of these provisions are covered within LD 1986. We believe Section 1 directs the 
implementation of an updated Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Program based on the DG 2.0 Stakeholder Working 
Group's recommendations and ensures Maine can receive federal funding to support our state's energy transition and 
increase access to clean energy for low-income Mainers. We appreciate this direction allows for the flexibility for the 
creation of a bridge for projects in the pipeline from DG 1.5 to the 2.0 program that requires storage, and offers the 
opportunity to consider a lane for community solar projects that are locally owned and addressing local load. 
Section 3 addresses our concerns regarding the reporting of costs and benefits and the critical importance of 
understanding the legitimate and verifiable costs and benefits as well as ensuring program benefits accrue to ratepayers. 
We would respectfully advocate for an addition in Section 3 that considers if the Commercial & Industrial Tariff program 
could be implemented in a different manner to ensure maximization of benefits to ratepayers, i.e. settling as load 
reduction as otherjurisdictions do versus on the wholesale market. Finally, we ask that there be clear legislative language 
regarding projects not considered in the DG 2.0 Stakeholder Working Group's proposals, speciﬁcally projects equal to or 
less than 1 MW or collocated with load to ensure the continuation of the successful Kilowatt Hour Credit program which 
currently provides net beneﬁts to ratepayers. 
Overall, we believe this bill affirms the critical importance of affordability for Maine's energy consumers and recognizes 
that thoughtful policy and regulatory certainty will provide renewable energy developers like Revision Energy the 
opportunity to continue to invest in Maine, driving down costs for all ratepayers and supporting the progress our state has 
made in becoming a clean energy and climate leader. Please pass LD 1986 now, in advance of a summer recess and 
address these issues with the timely attention they deserve. Thank you for your consideration; we are happy to answer 
further questions or provide additional information. 
Sincerely, 
Lindsay Bourgoine 
Director, Policy & Government Affairs 
Revision Energy 
207.819.5663 
AN EMPLOYEE~OWNED SOLAR COMPANY ~ BASED lN ME, MA 8NH
