 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:  May 8, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Environment and Natural Resources  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 1845, An Act to Regulate Outdoor Lighting  
 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources: I am writing today on behalf 
of the University of Maine System (UMS) to inform your consideration of LD 1845 , An Act to 
Regulate Outdoor Lighting.    
UMS  is still  working to understand the  applicability  to our publ ic universities  of the bill’s 
provisions , though we  believe most  outdoor lights across our statewide  System meet the  
standards being proposed .  
However, if LD 1845 does apply to UMS , we have already identif ied more than 100 outdoor 
lights at one of our rural regional campuses that would need to be replaced  and for which  
the fixtures  are not compatible  with lighting shields .  
We estimate the cost to that public university to come into compliance  would be at 
least $400,000 , which could not be  undertake n within  existing budget  resources . This 
fiscal note reflects re trofitting of existing light fixtures, as well as the addition  of new light 
fixtures  that would need to  be installed  to ensure  adequate  coverage , as the required 
downlights would  not illuminate  as much square footage .  
Assuming LD 1845 becomes law  90 days after the adjournment of th is special session , we 
also have concer n about our System ’s ability to secure a vendor  through our com petitive 
procurement process and have the required work complete d in the short period  between 
that date and Jan. 1, 202 4.   
Given this,  UMS requests  that the Committee consider  amending the c urrent bill to 
allow for  replacement of existing lighting units when they  become nonfunctional , 
rather than by Jan. 1, 2 024.  
Maine’s public universities a ppreciate the intent of this bill and share its supporters’  
commitment to reducing light pollutio n while maintaining  appropriate illumination  of our 
campuses to promote safety.  The S ystem will work with our facilities management 
professionals to furthe r under stand the impact of LD 1845 on Maine ’s publi c universities , 
and welcome conversation with the Committee about how to  best amend the bill to achieve 
its goals within a reaso nable timeframe and budgetary  resources.   
Please  let me know if I can provide additional information  for your work session . 
 
 
