Sarah Chang
Portland, Scientifically Speaking (WMPG Radio Show)
LD 1845
Hello,
My name is Sarah Chang and I am a co-host of Scientifically Speaking on WMPG 
where we discuss science close to home here in Maine for the past 5 years.
I love Maine because of the preserved night skies. Our largest city, Portland, has poor 
visibility to the night sky, only seeing the brightest stars with ease, but because of our 
size, we don’t have to go too far. In Cape Elizabeth, I can escape the light of the city 
and look out towards the ocean and see with decent visibility the beautiful center of 
our galaxy, the Milky Way, circling above us when skies are clear. But to the 
northeast we can see the glow from the city. Ever street light in my neighborhood has 
lights that glow upwards — wasted energy when the purpose is to illuminate the 
streets so we can navigate, rather the lighting the skies, hindering the ability to view 
the sky.
Visitors who come here often have never seen the night sky and Maine is a refuge for 
the stars and planets amongst an overly lit east coast. But we often get blinded by not 
only public street lights, but ineffective lighting by our fellow neighbors that disrupt 
our sleep with the brightest bulbs to ruin even the heaviest of sleepers circadian 
rhythms.
Just a 2 hour drive and you can see the most brilliant night sky you’ve ever seen — 
millions of bright little lights glitter across the backdrop of space and it’s all because 
of our limited light pollution.
Please include in this legislation recommendations for helping us to preserve and 
improve the conditions of visibility for dark skies, including:
1. Cutoff light fixtures (no light bleeding upwards into the sky)
2. Low color temperature lightbulbs of 3000k or lower
3. If possible, red light lamps rather than blue light
4. Fully shielded outdoor lighting
5. Dimmable lighting — smart lighting in neighborhoods to save energy at night and 
reduce light pollution.
We have shining examples on Mount Desert Island and we would be doing good 
things for human health, animal health, and the visibility of the night sky for all to 
decrease excessive or inappropriate use of lighting that negatively impacts the night 
sky. There is nothing to gain by being bright spots on the globe at night from the ISS.
Thank you for supporting this bill.
Sarah Chang, Portland, Maine.

