 33 McAlister Farm Road, Ste. 102   87 Winthrop Street  
Portland, ME  04103     Augusta, ME  04330  
207.747.4406      www.mainemfg.com  Manufacturers Association of Maine  
 
08 May  2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, we offer this 
testimony in opposition  of LD 1845, An Act to Regulate 
Outdoor Lighting.  
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a non -
partisan 501(c)6 non -profit grounded in service to its 
membership, providing a network of resources designed 
to support the strategic business growth needs of  Maine 
manufacturing entrepreneurs.  Maine’s manufacturing 
businesses are diverse, employing almost 60,000 
individuals in military and defense, aerospace, metal 
fabrication, paper, boat building, semi -conductor, wood 
products, aquaculture and biotech, medi cal device, 
composites, and bioplastics, as well as the food and 
beverage industries.  These businesses represent almost 
10% of Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all the wages 
paid in the state on a weekly basis.  MAME’s mission is to 
help manufacturing grow  and succeed and supports 
Maine’s development of future manufacturing assets 
through a variety of programs.  
The membership of the Association is diverse in size, 
scope and hours of operation.  Some of our members are 
small and operate only during tradition al business hours 
while others are large and run 24 hours a day.  While this 
bill will likely impact all members, it will absolutely affect 
our members with larger facilities or longer operational 
hours or those businesses who are mandated by law or 
regula tion to use certain types of lighting.  
  2023 Executive BOARD  
 
Chair of the Board  
Judith Borelli  
Texas Instruments  
 
Vice Chair of the Board, &  
Legislative Chair   
Dave Fortin  
Kennebec Technologies  
 
Treasurer & Investment Chair  
Samantha Pedersen  
Albin, Randall & Bennett  
 
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair  
Neal Prescott  
Prescott Associates  
 
Past -Chair & Energy Program Chair  
Alan LaPoint  
The Strainrite Companies  
 
Executive Director  
Mike Roughton  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAME_LD 1214 testimony 042623  
 33 McAlister Farm Road, Ste. 102   87 Winthrop Street  
Portland, ME  04103     Augusta, ME  04330  
207.747.4406      www.mainemfg.com  MAME members use outdoor lighting for a number of reasons.  Some may be 
aesthetic or decorative, but more likely those reasons are related to safety or 
security.  Well -placed lighting can deter theft or other nefar ious actions, while at 
the same time providing a level of comfort for patrons or employees entering and 
exiting the property or facility.  Trip and fall accidents can be reduced with well -lit 
walkways, and eliminating dark areas around the property discour ages criminal 
activity.  
Proper illumination can also reduce workplace accidents.  Many of our members 
utilize outdoor space as part of their manufacturing operations.  Often forklifts or 
heavy equipment are used, and a poorly lit space, be it indoors or o ut, can pose 
extreme safety issues; so failure to utilize proper lighting can put employees at 
greater risk of accidents or collisions.  
For the reasons above, it is extremely important that businesses are allowed to use 
the lighting that meet s their needs , and we ask that you vote ONTP on LD 1845.  
 
