DV. 101 Western Ave. ‘ '‘ 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coaiition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
$0 Eﬂd DOl‘!§6$'§iC Vlﬁlﬁmfiﬁ 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1034: “An Act to Require That Service of a Temporary 
Protection Order Be Attempted Within 48 Hours from the issuance of the Order.” 
Wednesday, March 22, 2023
\ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ regarding LD 1034, “An Act to Require That Service of a Temporary 
Protection Order Be Attempted Within 48 Hours from the issuance of the Order,” to provide 
you with information we hope will be useful to you in your consideration of this proposal. 
The protection from abuse statute currently directs Maine’s law enforcement 
community to “make a good faith effort to serve process expeditiously. ” The statute later 
goes on to direct: “Every law enforcement agency shall adopt a written policy on the service 
of protection from abuse orders that directs that every order issued under this chapter is 
served on the subject of the order as quickly as p0ssible. ”3 The Minimum Standards issued 
by the Maine Criminal Justice Academy Board of Trustees that all law enforcement agencies 
must comply with require each agency’s domestic violence policy to outline “procedures to 
ensure expeditious service of both temporary and permanent Protection from Abuse 
Orders.”4 The model policy promulgated by the Maine Chiefs of Police Association to carry 
out this Minimum Standard directs all officers to place a “high priority ” on service of both 
temporary and final orders as well as to document all service attempts, including the 
circumstances surrounding each service/attempt. Timely service of a protection order is 
critically important, not only for those that are protected under its terms, but also for 
defendants in these cases to have timely notification of the terms of the order as well as the 
allegations against them and their opportunity to be heard. For the most part, we think our 
law enforcement colleagues currently carry out these obligations well. 
‘ MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence and their children in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts 
to more than 5,000. 
1 Title 19-A, section 4107. 
3 Title 19-A, section 4114, subsection 11. 
4 Maine Criminal Justice Academy Board of Trustees Minimum Standard Policy 3, Domestic Violence Policy, 
effective date 11/01/2019. The 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
By and large, MCEDV and our member programs observe that Maine's law 
enforcement agencies do put the highest priority on service of these orders and are 
successfully serving them expeditiously. When temporary orders are issued, the court must 
set a hearing on the complaint within 21 days. ln the substantial majority of cases, process is 
served on the defendant in advance of that hearing date. Where service is delayed or not 
accomplished, typically it is due to: (1) insufficient or out of date information regarding the 
defendant ’s whereabouts provided to the serving agency; or (2) the defendant is engaging 
in purposeful attempts to avoid service. Most advocates across our programs, particularly 
those who regularly help survivors navigate the protection from abuse process, will have an 
example of how a well-intentioned, appropriately crafted policy or protocol around service 
or enforcement of a protection from abuse order wasn’t carried out as intended. However, 
generally speaking, these advocates and attorneys, who last year provided representation, 
court advocacy and/or court accompaniment to more than 5,000 survivors in Maine, are not 
observing systemic problems connected to a law enforcement agency’s failure to make 
timely attempts at service. 
MCEDV raised drafting concerns with the initial language printed in LD 1034 — in 
particular, we raised concerns that the language could be read to unintentionally define 
“expeditiously ” going forward as some period of time longer than 48 hours. We do not 
observe that law enforcement agencies are waiting more than 48 hours after notification of 
these orders to attempt service. ln fact, some agencies have created protocols wherein a 
service attempt is made at least once every shift, until the order is served. Some larger 
agencies have a designated employee whose responsibility it is to serve these orders to 
ensure that the orders do not languish. We worked with Representative Smith to put 
forward an amendment prior to today’s hearing that: decreases the likelihood we would be 
walking back what we consider to be the best practice interpretation of the current statute; 
is better aligned with existing language in the statute around how the chapter refers to 
orders that are not yet final; and which also accounts for the fact that the courts are now 
notifying law enforcement that an order needs to be served through a call to their dispatch, 
who can then draw down the court’s paperwork through a database, as opposed to relying 
on the US Postal Service to physically transport the order from the court to the law 
enforcement agency. While we do not see a need for the statutory language proposed, if 
you determine to go forward with a modification of the statute, the amendment that was 
distributed to the interested parties list could better effectuate the intent than the original 
language. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share this information. MCEDV would be available 
to work with interested parties and this Committee as the process moves forward. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Nlancuso, 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 430-8334, Email: andrea@mcedv.org
