Autumn Hill
thomaston
LD 1823
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, my name is Autumn
Hill, I am a youth from Thomaston and I am testifying in favor of LD 1823.  
As I understand the bill, it was passed last year to support local agriculture in Maine, 
hopefully allowing smaller farmers to thrive without being dominated by larger 
corporations. LD 1823 is a bill that will operationalize this constitutional amendment 
to reflect the wishes of Maine's farmers and make the support to local agriculture 
more concrete.
Maine's agriculture business is a core pillar of our state's well-being- if we refuse 
them the right to grow, harvest and consume their own food, are we truly supporting 
our farmers? It will also support Mainers who want to grow some of their own food 
and sell small amounts of it but do not have the funding for additional licenses or 
industrial kitchens. We cannot export food from outside regions forever, especially as 
climate change makes industrial farms less reliable. Therefore we must give our 
farmers the right to food sovereignty today so Maine's future generations have a better
tomorrow.
Throughout my poem, I explore how powerless many farmers, and citizens feel about 
this legislation that affects their livelihoods- sometimes it seems that those in power 
ignore our pleas in favor of larger corporations. This poem is related to LD 1823 
because it advocates for climate/agricultural action when it seems that no one is 
listening. I hope the poem will inspire change within those in power, because many 
youth feel far from enacting change which makes those who have that capability feel 
so, so far away.
Paper straw,
What do you do?
You distract us from
The people who neglect us
Because we know
That there is nothing we can do
But discuss, ride the bus,
Plead to the higher-ups
But deep down we know
As the paper straw dissolves in our cup
That it isn't up to us
It isn't us, who must change ways
All we can do is  pray and pray
                                               And pray
                                                             And pray
                                                                           And pray
That maybe someday
Those who ride their jets
Who drive their yachts 
Who sip on their wine
Made of our futures tears
Will combine and discuss our future
Or will they sit in denial
Passing the time pouring oil in our seas
For nothing but impermanent please
As they spread the disease
That raises our degrees?
Paper straw,
What do you do?

