 
  
 
 
Testimony of University of Maine Cooperative Extension, Presented by  
Extension Food Science Specialist  Beth Calder, To Inform  
LD 1823, An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food , May 10, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwers en, Representative Plueker  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry.  My name is Beth Calder and I am a Food 
Science Specialist for University of Maine Cooperative Extension, offering testimony today for your 
consideration of LD 1823 and similar proposals. I want to recognize my Extension colleagues with 
relevant expertise, R obson Machado, Extension Food Science Specialist, and Jason Bolton, Extension 
Associate Dean,  have also  provided input  and together  we have  concerns , which include:  
● Decreased consumer confidence in safety of Maine food products  
● Potential increase in unsafe foods  
● Lack of food safety oversight and food safety education  
● Vague language needs to be clarified  
 
UMaine  Cooperative  Extension  believes that Mainers should have a right to food , while increasing 
access to minimize food insecurity .  We  provide education and other technical assistance services 
statewide to support those activities, including  our popular Recipe to Market course , sani tation course,  
and Food Testing Services .  However, w e have seen numerous examples in which well -intentioned 
people have unknowingly produced unsafe food products that can affect public health . 
 
● Decreased consumer confidence in safety of Maine food product s 
Foods produced in Maine are associated with being high quality and safe, and  food entrepreneurs and 
businesses in Maine have worked tirelessly to maintain these virtues, which can be attributed partly to 
the success of the Maine Department of Agriculture , Conservation and Forestry (DACF) inspection 
program and UMaine  Cooperative Extension educational , testing , and research  programs.  A foodborne 
illness outbreak can be devastating not only to the food business owner, but can  affect similar products, 
the entire Maine food system , and could cause a decrease in consumer confidence in Maine local ly 
produced  foods.   Foodborne illnesses are extremely costly to the food industry, as quoted by the CDC: 
“Foodborne illness is common, costly, and preve ntable . CDC estimates that each year 1 in 6 Americans 
get sick from contaminated food or beverages and 3,000 die from foodborne illness. The U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) estimates that foodborne illnesses cost the United States more than 
$15.6 bil lion each year.” (CDC and Food Safety ).  
 
● Potential increase in production of unsafe foods  
Farmers and entrepreneurs in Maine are becoming more creative and seeking new ways to produce and 
preserve foods.   As the Director of the UMaine Food Testing Services, I field many o f these
questions from Mainers wanting to  preserve /produce  their products  safely. When creating new products, 
Maine people may unknowingly produc e potentially harmful foods that could conta in high levels of 
bacteria and/or toxins. Some examples of potentially harmful , high-risk foods include improperly 
produced canned food s, adding toxic plant ingredients, lack of proper food handling practices, producing 
foods in unsanitary conditions, and/ or not cooking, refrigerating, or freezing foods adequately. If 
continued deregulation of our food system occurs, more of these products will be consumed by Maine 
citizens. Without oversight from consumer food inspection, this possible increase in unsafe , high-risk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foods may negatively impact public health. Foodborne illnesses can range from mild illness (flu -like 
symptoms), to more serious prolonged hospitalizations , and/or death.  
 
● Lack of food safety oversight and food safety education  
We are fortunate in Maine that many food products can be produced under a home food license, with a 
very reasonable licensing fee of $20. Other states do not even allow products to be produced in a home 
kitchen. If a food producer wants to scale -up to a commercia l food processor’s license, which can be 
created within the home of the business owner, it is only $50 from the Maine DACF. As Extension 
Specialists, we  work closely with our Consumer Protection Inspectors , as they  support food business 
owners by visiting their kitchen s and observing their process es. They educate and assist food producers 
with proper food safety and sanitation practices to ensure safe food production . Without this contact with 
inspectors, and since most food producers are  not educated on sa fe food practices, they may 
unknowingly produce unsafe foods. It is a requirement by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and 
the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF) that all food producers must 
follow Good Manufacturing Pra ctices ( Current Good  Manufacturing Practices ). Food producers that are 
not inspec ted may not know about the FDA’s required food allergen labeling law ( Guidance for Industry 
in Regards to Food Allergen Labeling ) and may not adequately inform consumers of potential allergens 
in their foods. Undeclared allergens are the leading cause of food recalls ( Increase in Food Recalls ). 
Deregulation of Maine food production will remove current food safety checks that inspection 
provi des to protect consumer public health from unsafe food products. Not requiring Maine DACF 
licensing and inspection of food production may increase public health risk to Mainers and our valuable 
tourist industry.  
 
● Vague language needs to be clarified  
The food bills LD 725 (the previous Food Sovereignty bill) and LD 1823 (this proposed bill)  are vague 
and confusing for food producers, consumers, regulators, and those of us who educate and assist new 
food producers. We suggest the terms of LD 1823, and any new food bills moving forwar d, be more 
clearly defined. It should delineate where unregulated/unlicensed food products can be sold within food 
sovereign towns (does it pertain to Facebook Marketplace, and local farmers markets in food sove reign 
towns only). The language should  include that no products can be sold outside food sovereign 
jurisdictions where they are produced , and online (internet) sales are prohibited, as most foods sold  
across Maine’s lines would fall under the U.S. Food and  Drug Administration’s (FDA) jurisdiction and 
producers must follow their rules and regulations. Clear definitions will ass ist
regulatory agencies in determining when unlicensed, unregulated food producers must comply with and 
follow state regulations.   Of special concern are some of the definitions under LD 1823, Sec. 6. 7 MRSA 
§282. Definitions. By removing the face -to-face transaction requirement (1.) and adding the vague 
mutually agreed -to terms language, the bill would allow any food to  be sold under any circumstances. 
The addition of the definition of Traditional Foodways (4.) makes it even easier for any food to be sold 
under any arrangement. These changes open the gates for the complete deregulation of all food 
commerce in the jurisdi ctions under the Food Sovereignty Act. We view this as a step back that can 
potentially put the lives of Mainers at risk  and possibly undermine the Maine brand and food businesses 
that already are licensed and inspected to ensure they are producing safe fo ods.  If consumers would 
like to purchase unlicensed, unregulated food products, they should be properly informed .  We 
feel the  transaction should only take place at the site of production so consumers can make more 
informed decisions about the cleanliness  and practices of that food producer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In summary, we are fortunate in Maine to have a vibrant food economy and a safe , local food supply, 
which can be attributed to our state regulatory agencies , and partners like UMaine  Cooperative  
Extension , providing the necessary education and support for our Maine food producers.   We strongly 
urge the Committee to take seriously the potential food safety risks that could threaten Maine public 
health if food production and sales are further deregulated in Maine. Please know that UMaine  
Cooperative  Extension stands as a ready resource for those looking to start or grow food -based 
busine sses in the state, as well as to policymakers seeking to reduce barriers while upholding standards 
of consumer safety.  Thank you for considering this important information , and please let me know if 
there is any additional information  I can provide in advance of your work session . 
 
 
 
 
 
