 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN OPPOSITION  -  LD 1823 ‘An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food ’ 
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen - Chair, Representative Pluecker - Chair, and Members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry,  
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers 
Association  (MGFPA) .  The Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association is a business trade association 
representing Maine’s food community; Main Street businesses , including independently owned and operated 
grocery stores and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, 
distributors, and supportive service companies.  
 
Food safety is paramount and our members value compliance with  Maine’s food laws and regulations for good 
reason. It only takes one food borne illness to impact the entire food community. I specifically remember 
during a board meeting, one large Maine food  producer , describing the headache of working through a 
product recall . It required complex logistical coordination  and then  necessary brand management post -recall.  
 
There are numerous food safety regulations governing the growing, production and processi ng, distribution 
and selling of food products to protect the investments made by these businesses, and the health of their 
customers.  There is nothing more valuable to maintain the health and viability of the industry than the trust 
of the consuming publi c.  Licensed food manufacturers have access to training, technical assistance, sanitation 
best practices, and food safety protocols through the Department of Agriculture. The low barriers to entry 
including a $20 home kitchen license  and $50 sample test for canned food tested through the Food Testing 
Services at the University of Maine are minimal investments made to preserve the health of Maine’s citizens 
and our state’s food reputation.  
 
According to the 2023 Feeding the Economy Rep ort, America’s food and agriculture sector, shows increased 
economic output in every state compared to the 2022 report. Maine’s economic impact from the food and 
agriculture sector includes more than 205,000 jobs, $10B in total wages, and a total output of  $32.93B. This 
includes the direct economic impact employed and doing business in agriculture, manufacturing, wholesaling, 
and on - and off -premise retailing as well as supplier and induced economic impact across manufacturing, 
transportation, government, f inancial services and beyond.1 
 
We’re opposed to modifying  the “Direct producer -to-consumer transaction” definition  from ‘at the site of 
production of those food or food products’  to ‘directly between a food producer and a consumer under 
mutually agreed -to terms .’ Our same concerns  remain from when a version of this update was  presented in LD 
574 of the 130th legislature. A mutually agreed upon location,  which can include beyond the place of 
production , no longer gives the consumer the opportunity to visualize the production environment and  no 
longer affords  them the opportunity to make an informed decision on whether or not they feel comfortable 
buying a product from an unlicensed  producer  based on the production site .   
 
1 https://goodstone.guerrillaeconomics.net/reports/0b790408 -64c3 -4730 -9dc0 -b585e14e557d  May 10, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
  
We have concerns about the realities of what this proposed legislation will allow for in terms of what then 
defines  the marketplace  or the mutually agreed -upon terms . We question if this opens the doors to 
unregulated e -commerce sales? Does a website qualify as a mutually agreed upon place of exchange?  How 
does this affect the potential sales of unlicensed goods across state lines?  
 
We are pleased to hear the testimony from the Maine Federat ion of  Farmer s’ Markets and their request to 
continue to regulate the sales environment they’ve work ed so diligently to create. To quote one of our 
members when asked about this legislation, “Farmers ’ markets have spent years gaining public trust and the 
first time someone gets s ick (or worse) from food traced back to the market it will have an effect on all 
markets and food producers.”   
 
We’re fortunate in Maine that value -added food products are so highly regarded. The Maine brand is vital to 
our members who make substantial inv estments in their facilities, their employees, their businesses and their 
communities.   We ask that you continue to protect those who value the services and reputation of being a 
licensed food producer  while striking a balance for those efforts to further  address food insecurity.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony . 
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

