Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker, and members of the AFC Committee,  
 
I represent no enti ty or agency other than myself as a resident, taxpayer, and property owner in Maine, and am 
testifying in strong support of LD1823.  
 
For the last seven years I’ve watched food freedom in Maine expand and even witnessed my own Town finally 
assert its right t o define the food systems of its own choosing.  Along th is journey  I’ve met a lot of folks , took my 
time to understand them, share their goals, their losses, their dreams , and their struggles , and forged lasting 
friendships  based on trust and respect.  We are all good people with profound life experiences, with families, with 
hope.  Not enemies.  
 
• Since 2010, f ood sovereignty communities ( approximately 117 of them ) have swelled make up about a 
quarter of the entire State  of Maine , in terms of population and by political subdivision s.  Did the 
prophesy of impending wave s of chaos consisting of food -borne illnesses and lawsuits in the absence of 
the heavy hand of the State over the last 12  years  unfold ? Did scores of bodies crash onto  the streets of 
folks clutching their stomachs in agony over a bad whoopie pie or bowl of clam chowder? No to both . If 
someone says otherwise, they need to stand up and prove it publicly  at the podium in front of you , rather 
than slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine and gives hope to Mainers and across the nation.  
 
• The whole world is going to hell in a hand -basket and Maine has been  ravaged by  mental health , drug 
addiction, an d homelessness epidemic s for years , yet our  unelected and unaccountable agency operatives 
are targeting families that are  producing food  for their communities  in rural Maine ? Are you kidding me, 
this insanity is still going on?  If someone says that this ma kes sense, then they need to stand up and prove 
it publicly at the podium in front of you rather than slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine 
and gives hope to Mainers and across the nation.   
 
ALERT:  Guess what, food freedom helps to alleviate mental health issues, drug addiction, and 
homelessness.  
 
• Food freedom attracts needed in -migration, improves the socio -economic condition, assists in every facet 
of healthy local and regional planning , dissolves  the risks of racial and social inequality , and strengthens 
identity, cooperation, and ownership of the diverse peoples in our communities as we attempt to rebuild 
Maine.  If someone is against these benefits , they need to stand up and state it publicly at the podium in 
front of you rather than slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine and gives hope to Mainers and 
across the nation.  
 
• And less face it, Maine simply does not have the resources  or infrastructure  for sustainabili ty and security  
right now , and it’s at the end of the line in terms of national distribution and support. We really ha ve no 
choice but to decentralize food production and allow  local communities to become more resilient, secure, 
and healthy  and get us out of the mess we’re in . If some unelected unaccountable employee who gets a 
paycheck from me sees different, they can get a job in an authoritarian state elsewhere,  rather than 
slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine and gives hope to Mainers and across the nation.  
 
To me, given all of these factors, it seems quite numb to not to embrace food sovereignty.   
 
When there are fearmongers  among us , which there al ways will be , I tend to apply the Socrates ‘’Triple -filter 
test’’ to any antagonist arguments against hope and opportunity:  
 
• Regarding the truth:  Does this person  know for a fact that this information is true? Is this person willing 
to bet on it? Will this person  be able to prove it to anyone? Are they  willing to compromise their 
reputation and employment over this?  
• Regarding the good:  Does it benefit the person  or all of Maine ? Will  their argument  make them or Maine  
better and evoke positive emotions? Will the situation in Maine  improve  by oppressing  hope and 
opportunity?  
• Regarding the necessary or useful:  By knowing this argument against hope and opportuni ty, will  life in 
Maine  improve? Should  Maine  take any practical action regarding this information or message? In what 
way does not knowing this information hurt or affect Maine ? 
• If what we are being told isn’t true, isn’t good, and isn’t even useful, why would we entertain it?”  
On May 5, 2023, I was pleasantly surprised to find this legislative bill in my inbox. As a member of the LPC, I 
was asked to review it and provide the position of the region that I represent.  I voted in favor of this bill , without 
question.  
 
I was amazed at the deep thought and comprehension that went into this non -partisan bill, LD1823 , and wondered  
for a moment why this oddly felt so  different from the day -to-day poorly crafted and incomplet e bills churned out 
in Augusta , you know, the ones  that offer  nothing less than a constant headache . 
 
This was no typical  emergency bill, it was not a stop -gap measure, it was not a favor bill, and it was not some  
half-baked attempt to provide temporary relief to those impacted by calamity , which the calamity is more often 
than not due to poor state policy -making.  It is a bill affirming right, a document showing the State is taking its job 
seriously.  
 
In an era of perpetual pandemics, water corporatization/theft, drug addiction, mental health issues, homelessness, 
cost of living burdens/inflation, bank failures, fearmongering, and war, this is also a bill of hope . 
 
It came as  a breath of fresh air to see Maine re -affirm and continue to differentiate itself from the other 49 states 
in the country in this bill. As people flee dysfunction al states across the country, Maine is a destination for those 
who seek the ideals of food resiliency and security, those who seek the ideals of creating and produ cing, and those 
who seek hope.  Other States have been  watching Maine and wishing to move  in our direction as well ( Dirigo ), 
away from the jackboot authoritarian approach  of a bygone era  that’s resulted in only oppression , dependency , 
monopolization, and corporatocracy . 
 
The ideas  laid forth in LD1823 are needed  (e.g. community gardens, land lease & conveyance for food 
production, food forests, edible landscapes ), as smaller communities in Maine  sometimes need a catalyst, a spark , 
to begin the brainstorming process on what is possibl e as they shape and manage their local designs with local 
volunteers on a shoestring budget.  No one knows everything, we all have to work together and share ideas.  
 
Example: Do you know why  most  long-term comprehensive plans throughout Maine  don’t even mention  food 
resili ency and food security  at all ? Because it doesn’t exist in 30-A MRSA, Chapter 187  as a starting point  or 
seed crystal  for discussion. And s ince it  isn’t important  enough  to the State, it’s not important to regional planning 
commissions ( who develop services and documents to support Towns ) either , so there’s no box to check, and 
ultimately is not considered and largely overlooked by  our Towns . But this is easily fixable.  
 
In LD1823, the State truly back s up the talk with  tangible  ACTION , leading by example and proving  that it 
desires an integrated State approach that honors the legislative construct of our state, our constitution, and all 
Mainers . What a r efreshing  concept!  
 
 
What I do find quite disappointing , and why  LD1823  is needed , is the lack of cohesion and communicat ion 
identified between silos of unelected agencies throughout th is State . Unaccountable agencies who h arbor  random 
employees that impose their subjective and arbitrary will on the citizenry , use that power of the state to intimidate 
Mainers in a manner that frustrates State law and our constitution , and skulk and collud e behind closed doors to 
spread division, fear, anger, and resentment in the halls in Augusta . This is  completely unacceptable, by any  
standard.  
 
Besides  being just plain wrong, t hese disconnects within the State give the  public  perception of a general  lack of 
the leadership and functionality  in Augusta  (things we desperately need ). This is what strains the public trust and 
paralyzes  the healing and strengthening timeline of this state .  
 
Legislating through rule-making , using the force of the State as a weapon against Mainers , and exhibiting an 
indifference to the State Constitution and our legal construct are all abhorrent practice s that needs to stop.  This 
shoul d be culled out at the agency level  and any power -tripping rogue employees  or agencies  need to be held 
accountable for their dam aging behaviors.  
 
In accordance with Article 1 Section 25 of the State of Maine Constitution , the legislature needs to affirm the 
will of the people through effective agency policy , accountability , and alignment  measures . These measures will  
assure the spirit of the constitutio nal amendment is being executed by all employees with the State , and reduce s 
rogue inter -agency actions  that create liability for Maine , damage s the public trust , and slow s healthy growth in 
our communities . 
 
Hope is free. I like hope. It helps you all as well  by making  your jobs easier  (and more enjoyable ). I’ll take hope 
any day of the week over someone who walks up to the podium today and pimps fear, anger, resentment, and 
division. When was the last time you saw a message of hope in the media? It’s been a long time and we all miss it 
so and want it back  so.  
 
Fear, anger, resentment, and division are far more dangerous than a ny home -baked pie bought from a friend  
thinking of starting a business could ever be. I’m done with fear, anger, resentment, and division , and so is 
everyone else . Let’s be reasonable  and promote hope . 
 
If someone  decides their  life decisions should be based on fear, fine, let them use our coveted New England  local  
town meeting structure  that is the envy of others across the nation  (e.g. petition, organize, run for local 
government , debate in town meeting s), go argue the merits of living in fear and the benefits of  government 
clamping  down on freedom, opportunity, and hope  to their own neighbors, family, and friends  if that is one’s 
desire , and look them right in the eye with a straight face when they do it . But leave that  fear at the political 
boundary of your own town , as this fear should not be spread like a disease and done so anonymously through  the 
State, as it does not supersede communities who use the New England town meeting process  for its intended 
purpose,  to solve problems and  argue the merits of opportunity and hope.  
 
We need to step asid e, refrain from the heavy -handed  and fruitless  approach of the past , and allow our 
communities to figure out how to best address the food security and resiliency problem in Maine. Historically, 
whenever there was a problem facing us, it w as and will  always continue to be solved best at the local level.  
 
‘’When, in some obscure country town, the farmers come together to a special town meeting, to express 
their opinion on some subject which is vexing the land, that, I think, is the true Congress, and the most 
respectable one that is ever assembled in the United States .’’ ~Henry David Thoreau.  
 
I urge the committee to vote OUGHT TO PASS on LD1823 , a positive bill in an era of struggle that is filled to 
the brim with tasty , nutritious  goodness, a buoyant bill that quickly rises  to the surface in a sea of otherwise 
disappointing half -baked measures  and oily mistakes  cooked up in Augusta . 
