 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Re: In Opposition to LD #1823 "An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food " 
May 9th, 2023   
Sen. Ingwerson, Rep. Pluecker and distinguished members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry; 
My name is Gina Garey; I am a professional animal behaviorist at Animal Behavior and Healing 
in Portland and the Maine State Director for Animal Wellness Action and Center for a Humane 
Economy.  
I write today in opposition to LD 1823, (An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food.), and 
respectfully ask the committee to VOTE NO on LD 1823. 
While on the surface  LD 1823, “An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food,”  appears 
worthy, as written, the potential implications of the language in L.D. 1823 are far reaching and 
dangerous for Maine wildlife and the environment. 
 
A review by general counsel at AWA/CHE offered the following assessment: “The biggest issue 
we see with this is where local municipalities can enact “traditional foodways” ordinances 
without any state interference or oversight. While we see that language in the bill itself, the bill 
summary seems to grant some ability to override local ordinances, stating: 
‘Prohibit the State from enforcing any law or rule, taking an enforcement action or interfering 
in any way with the activities authorized by a local food ordinance, except those State laws or 
rules that involve the State's meat and poultry products inspection, registration and licensing 
program.’ 
 
My biggest concern is that this bill, as badly and vaguely written as it is, will allow for local 
hunting and fishing ordinances that ignore statewide conversation and wildlife management 
plans to maintain healthy populations of many species. It potentially sets up a virtual hunting 
free-for-all where rural municipalities can declare open season, all year round with no kill limits 
on bears and other fragile species. Since “traditional pathways” also includes “uses of food 

products other than for eating” that could mean, for example, open trade in bear bile with the 
state powerless to stop it. The idea that states should be precluded from managing wildlife at 
the state level is ludicrous and an inevitable ecological disaster. No wonder the state agencies 
are concerned.”   
In summary, this proposal has the potential to strip away a wide array of Maine statutes that 
protect wildlife, landowners, and the environment. It would:  
• Prohibit the enforcement of Maine’s wildlife, marine life, animal welfare, and 
environmental protection statutes that might interfere with “traditional foodways” 
(e.g., hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering & foraging) if towns and counties pass 
ordinances to protect such “foodways.” 
  
• Legalize activities such as Sunday-hunting (long opposed by a vast majority of 
Mainers!), or open trade in bear bile with the state powerless to stop it because of 
language that includes “hunting” and “uses of food products other than for eating” in 
the definition of “traditional foodways.” 
  
• Designate wild animals as objects to be owned and used because of the way “harvest” 
is defined in the bill; a definition that includes hunting, trapping, fishing, taking, killing 
for sport, wildlife management and population control.  The proposed definition 
statutorily equates the act of killing wildlife (for any reason) with gathering berries or 
harvesting a field of corn.  
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Gina Garey, MS CABAC   Animal Behavior and Healing                                                                                                                      
Maine State Director- Animal Wellness Action & The Center for a Humane Economy 
 
 
 
Animal Wellness Action 
611 Pennsylvania Ave SE #136 
Washington, DC 20003 
United States 
 
Helping animals helps us all. 
 
 
 
