Helen Poertner
Bar Harbor
LD 1823
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Helen 
Poertner, I live in Bar Harbor, Maine, and  I am here today to testify in favor of LD 
1823.
I am a farmer and student about to finish my undergraduate degree in food systems. In
the course of my studies, I have focused on principles of food sovereignty and 
resilient, decentralized food systems. I see this bill as a real opportunity to take action 
on what was passed in the Amendment to Establish a Right to Food and am grateful 
to see this proposal in the legislature. 
The climate crisis is caused by corporate greed and focusing on big corporations to 
feed us in the future will not work. The most resilient food systems are local ones that
build on interpersonal relationships and are made up of a large number of small 
producers. I think it is of critical importance that these relationships and practices, that
luckily already exist in many parts of Maine, are legally protected. Following the 
principles of food and seed sovereignty that prioritize all people, from growers to 
consumers, over corporations will lead to a much more resilient food system in the 
face of climate change. 
I further especially appreciate the proposed points regarding edible landscaping and 
programing in public schools. I believe that it is critical for young people to learn 
where and how their food grows to become active, critical members of shaping our 
food system in the future. Creating pathways for edible landscaping especially in 
public spaces not only provides food for people who do not have enough to eat but 
also brings the possibility of learning that food can be grown in many small, 
decentralized places and that everyone in Maine can have a stake in the food system. 
Members of the Committee On Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, I urge you to
support LD 1823, An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food. 
Thank you. 

