I am opposed to LD 1823, specifically this section: 
 
1. Direct producer-to-consumer transaction. "Direct producer-to-consumer  transaction" means a face-
to-face transaction involving an exchange of food or food products at the site of production of those 
food or food products directly between a food producer and a consumer under mutually agreed-to 
terms. 
 
This section has been jammed into a bill that has other reasonable sections. My main concern is FOOD 
SAFETY. Baking cookies, cakes, etc the chance of someone getting sick is unlikely. If we look at low 
sugar jams/jellies or canned processed pickles, salsa, etc you get into the realm of acidified foods that 
are potentially hazardous. State licensing would require that these go to the food safety lab at Umaine 
Orono for a process review. 
 
This ordinance would allow cider making. If drops were used and the apples were in an area where 
domestic or wild animals roam, e. coli could be introduced into the cider. 
 
Raw milk and cheeses made from raw milk could be a potential for contamination beginning at the 
udder, skin, feces, milking equipment, handling and storage. Contamination is often not detectable until 
growth is significant. The state license requires testing. The dairy licensing fee is $25. 
 
The cost of a Home Food License is $20. The information below is from the DACF inspector for the 
area. Most home kitchens with a 2 bay sink, or a single sink and dishwasher are acceptable. Work 
surfaces need to be smooth and easily cleanable. Walls and floors need to be solid and cleanable. They 
must have a working refrigerator, and hot and cold running water. A private well must have the water 
tested annually for coliform and nitrates (this would be the biggest cost if they are on a well). The 
septic must be approved as being adequate by local code. 
 
Home food processing inspections are more about education than inspection. As part of the licensing 
process, the inspector provides education regarding food safety, sanitation, labeling, allergen control, 
and distribution. Labeling should contain contact information, list of ingredients and allergens 
highlighted.  Milk, Eggs, Tree nuts, Peanuts, Wheat and Soy. This is NOT a requirement 
 
Any health incidents caused by this ordinance would put a negative spin on the local food movement. 
 
As the DACF inspector says “You don’t know, what you don’t know”. 
 
One solution would be to require that any food sovereign producer be required to take a certified Food 
Safety class. After completion of the course they would receive a certificate that they passed the 
required training. Umaine extension would be the best place to handle training like this. 
 
Respectfully submitted 
 
 
Jack McAdam 
Springvale 
 
