Louisa Hart
Brunswick
LD 1823
Esteemed members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee, 
I write to ask that you vote NO on LD 1823 “An Act to Respect and Protect the Right 
to Food”. While I agree we have a right to food, there are numerous egregious aspects
of hunting embedded in this bill, which are hidden beneath the benign sounding title. 
As proposed this bill would have several negative consequences. 
For one, permitting Sunday hunting in forest or field that the public uses for quiet 
recreation (walking, biking trails, nature/wildlife watching) would impact our feeling 
of safety. A major large intact forest in my community is such a place. It is regularly 
used by individuals and families for relaxation, particularly on the weekend. The 
activities this proposal suggests, would create tension and resentment between hunters
and non-hunters. You set a dangerous precedent if you eliminate the one peaceful day 
of the week we have in the forest. I respectfully request that Sunday be held sacred 
and not be regarded as routine. 
Another reason I ask you to vote NO on this proposal is, endorsing inhumane 
practices that bypass animal welfare should under no circumstances by tolerated. This
includes “uses of food products other than for eating” such as open trade in bear bile. 
I object to the broad interpretation of “harvest” which defiles traditional hunting for 
food or legitimate gathering of true food such as mushrooms, berries, etc.. Bear bile is
not a food product. 
REAL hunters I know have respect for life, compassion and use self-restraint. I have 
witnessed year after year the debasing and chipping away of all mans’ nobler values. 
We are raising a younger generation of hunters that are indifferent to suffering, who 
aim to have no bounds or constraints placed upon them and lack a sense of morals and
integrity. We must consider how this bodes for society at large. The language in L.D. 
1823 has far-reaching dangerous implications for Maine wildlife and the environment.
I therefore respectfully ask you to vote No on this proposal.
Yours Sincerely,

