TESTIMONY OF  
Patrick Keliher  
Department of Marine Resources  
 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying  
In Opposition to  
LD 1823 An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food  
Before  the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
Sponsored by Senator Hickman  
Date of Hearing: May 1 0, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecke r, and members of the Joint Standing Committee  on Marine 
Resources, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of  the Department of Marine Resources, and I 
am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition  to LD 1823. 
 
DMR’s concerns regarding the changes proposed by LD 1823 relate to the Department’s ability to 
effectively manage Maine’s marine resources, and the Department’s ability t o enforce the laws and 
regulations intended to ensure the conservation and propagation of those resources, as well as public 
health.   
 
Section 6 provides a definition for “traditional foodways” which includes  “customs of food production, 
preservation, pr eparation and presentation: hunting, gathering, fishing, foraging, buying and selling 
food; uses of food products other than eating; and food folklore.”   Section 12  then  gives  authority to 
local municipalities to adopt ordinances regarding traditional food ways , and direct producer -to-
consumer transactions.   Section 15 requires that any ordinance regarding traditional foodways and 
direct producer -to-consumer transactions be liberally construed.   Collectively, t hese changes could 
significantly impact DMR’s  adminis tration of fisheries management  and food safety laws.    
 
The new definition of “traditional foodways” could allow the adoption of ordinances relating to 
commercial fishing that are without restriction and  which could  conflict with state laws intended to 
comply with federal fisheries management requirements .  Under existing law (Title 12 Section 6671) 
munipalities are already given specific authority to develop shellfish conservation programs, and adopt 
ordinances to govern specific aspects of shellfish harv est.  For species that are managed through 
interstate (Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission) or federal (New England Fisheries 
Management Council) bodies, Maine  could lose its compliance with fisheries management plans, which 
would affect Maine’s ab ility to participate in those fisheries and to engage in interstate commerce for 
those species.      
 
Maine DMR ensures the safety  of consumption of shellfish through multiple programs within its 
Bureau of Public Health.  The Biotoxin Monitoring Program mo nitors levels of Paralytic Shellfish 
Poisoning (PSP) and other marine biotoxins in shellfish and implements closures to the harvest of 
shellfish when toxin is found at levels near or above where human illness may occur.  The  
 
Shellfish Growing Area Classi fication Program monitors the water quality at Maine shellfish flats and 
conducts shoreline surveys to identify sources of pollution.  The Maine Shellfish Dealer Certification 
and Inspection Program uses the standards outlined by the National Shellfish San itation Program 
(NSSP) to evaluate and certify all wholesale shellfish dealers in Maine. These dealers must be certified 
under the NSSP to ship, or process shellfish for shipment, within and outside of the state of Maine. By 
making sure that wholesale shel lfish dealers meet these standards, the safety and wholesomeness of 
the shellfish being purchased by consumers is ensured.    Collectively, these programs have earned 
Maine shellfish a national reputation for high quality and safety.   Any incidents resulti ng from 
deviations from these requirements negatively impact the Maine brand and the value of our fisheries.  
 
Finally, Section 21 adds a definition of “harvest”  to th at Part of Title 12 pertaining to Marine Resource 
statute.    Harvest is not a term that is commonly used within those statutes, but including this term in 
this Part may be aimed at clarifying that the right to harvest in the right to food constitutional 
amendment (Article I, Section 25) includes fishing  for marine resources .  This could impact the abililty 
of DMR to enforce applicable  fishing laws statewide, including laws relating to licensing, resource 
management , and food safety.    
 
In closing, LD 1823 introduces significant ambiguity that would negatively impact the State’s ability to 
appropriately manage marine resources and protect public health.   Thank you for your consideration, 
and I would be happy to ans wer any questions you m ight have.  
 
 
