TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  –  
IN OPPOSITION  TO  
“L.D. 1823, An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food ” 
Committee On Agricultur e, Conservation and Forestry  
May 10 , 202 3 
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony regarding  L.D. 1823, An Act to Respe ct and Protect the Right to Food .”   
 
I support self -reliance and the concept of food soverei gnty, but not when  it allows the potential to disregard or override  state 
regulation s in place to pro tect wildlife , landowners , animal  welfare, and our environment . 
 
There are  some positive suggestions within L.D. 1823  includ ing installation of edible landscaping in Capitol Park  and the 
right for all citi zens to have a vegetable garden . However , other  sections of this b ill contain language  which  threaten s Maine 
statutes that offer critical protections to our wildlife, our environment, and  Maine landowners while disrespecting the 
legislature’s aut hority and agencies that  create and enforce these vital protections.  
 
Authority  to Adopt Ordinances  & “Traditional Foodways ”  
 
The language in the “Authority ” section of L.D. 1823, a llows municipalities and counties to adopt o rdinances specific to 
newly defined  “traditional  foodways ” and requires  that “the Sta te shall recognize such ordinances .”   By allowing 
municipalities and entire counties to pass ordinances that ensure access to “traditional foodways ” (e.g., hunting, trapping, 
gatherin g, fishing, foraging ) that can override state sta tutes,  the language of L.D . 1823 presents  significant threats to 
existing wildlife regulations, animal welfare and environmental protection statutes.   
 
There is noth ing in this bi ll to ensure that t he ordinances  considered in the pursuit of food sovereignty  and preser vation of 
“traditional  foodways ” abide by, or improve on, existing landowner, animal welfare , wildlife,  and environmental pr otection 
statutes.   As a result, a town or county could  pass ordinance s that allow  citizens and businesses to ignore regulations this  
legislature has put in place to protect  our state .   
 
Enforcement & Interference Prohibited  
 
Apart from  meat and poultry products inspection, registration and licensing regulations under the Department  of Agriculture , 
this bill prohibits state agencies from enforcing statutes  and rules  that conflict with town and county ordinances  
passed regarding "traditional foodways" (which include hunt ing, trapping, fishing, foraging, etc.)   
 
For example, u nder the proposed language  of this bill,  a Main e town or county  could pass  ordinance s that: 
• Legaliz e Sunday hunting  (already challenge d in the Maine Supreme court under the Right to Food .) 
• Extend hunting/trapping  seasons  or eliminat e closed seasons completely.  
• Walk back humane standards for farm animals . 
• Allow banned p ractices such as participation  in the bear bile  trade  under the definition of “traditional  foodways ” 
(“uses of food  products other than for eating .”) 
• Enable fishing of species that are currently limited or banned . 
 
The language in the Enforcement Prohibit ed section , along with the proposed definition  of the Right to Food  (“Protect and 
respect, by not interfering  with, the right to food ”) leave s authorit ies, as well as individual s, powerless to take action when 
state statutes or property rights are violated.  
 
The section identifying the principles  of Food Sovereignty , while full of be autiful  concepts  of sharing knowledge and working 
with nature  - is not a sufficient  substitute  for actual laws that protect  farm animals, wildlife , environment  and landowners.  
2 | LD 1823  Testimony ( S. Richer)   
 
Harvest  Definition  
 
L.D. 1823 Proposed “Harvest” definition:  
 
 "Harvest, the verb. The verb "harvest" means to gather, forage, catch, trap, hunt, fish, take or kill for human consumption, 
sport, wildlife management or populatio n control."  
 
While the word “harvest ” is often used by government wildlife and fisheries  agencies  as a more palatable  term for killing or 
reporting number of animals killed , the proposed definition statutorily equates the act of killing wildlife (for any reason) with 
gathering berries or harvesting a field of corn.  This definition of “harvest” in conjunction with the “Right to Food” 
implies ownership of wild anima ls as well as a right to hunt and opens the door to violations of existing laws 
intended to protect wildlife and landowners.  
 
Hunting is a privilege not a right.  We don’t harvest animals; we kill them. We do not “own” wildlife; we hold wildlife in pu blic 
trust.  Wild animals are not ours to do with as we please.     
 
Addit ionally, the word "harvest" should not statutorily define taking the life of an animal.  Whether for sustenance, population 
"control" or for sport - killing is killing.   Killing an animal in the wild (or otherwise) should not be weighed equally under 
the law as reaping a field of whea t planted on owned or leased land for human consumption.   
 
We harvest fruits, vegetables, and grains.  We slaughter livestock.  We kill wildli fe. 
 
So much in this bill  confirms  and adds to  my original fears  regarding the potential  consequences of th e Right to Food 
constitutional amendment . I hope this committee will take the time necessary to  fully analyze the implications that the 
current language of  L.D. 1823 will have on the protection  of Maine ’s landowners , wildlife,  and environment.  
 
Please vote “Ought not to  pass” on L.D, 1823, as written.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration . 
 
Susanna Richer   
Portland, ME  
 
 
Susanna Richer
Corrected comments.  Portland
LD 1823
Corrected testimony.
