          Suzanne Dunham  
          29 Du nham Rd.  
Maine Législature                   Gree nwood, ME 04255  
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestr y                            May 10, 2023  
 
Attn: Maggie Hoo d 
 
RE: Testimony for LD 1823  
I am writing to express my supp ort for LD 1823 . 
In 2016 I began the process of bringing the Lo cal Food and Community Self Governanc e Ordinance 
(LFCSGO) to my town of Greenwood at the annual town meeting in 2017. The more I read about the 
Ordina nce and the many success stories from town s that had instituted the Ord inance, the more I knew 
this would be a positive step for my town.  
My husband and I operate a dedicated gluten -free licensed commercial kitchen and we are maple 
producers. We also co -manage t he Greenwood Far mers ’ Market.   
The process took about a year, including bringing the proposal to a public hearing, and finally to the  
citizens of the town of Greenwood. The LFSGO was passed unanimously at the 2017 annual town 
meeting.  
In great part, the Ordinance has been extremely helpful and empowering for us since we are a rural area 
with few major employers. Our ski season is the primary business in these western foot hills. By  
implementing  the LFSCGO many people are now able to bring in an income that they otherwise may 
not be able to accomplish . It is not un usual for our community members to cobble jobs together to make 
ends m eet.  
The Ordinance has been in place here for 6 years ; it has been very successful.  The two testimonials  in 
the attached  were part of the prop osal to imple ment the LFCSGO in Greenwood.  They were vendors at 
the Greenwood Farmers ’ Market. Today, Greenwood Bean has dramatically increased business, 
purchased more/new coffee roasting equipment and continues  to thrive  as a small business in western 
Maine. Amy Wight Chapman now works at the Beth el Historical Society and is board president of the 
Bethel Library , which meant she had to give up the baking business . Both scenarios  outline the benefits 
of local food sovereignty.  
Thank you.  
Suzanne J. Dunham  
Dunham Farm . Velvet Hollow Sugar Works  
29 Dunham Rd., Greenwood, ME 04255  
207-665-2967 
dunhamfarm@msn.com  
Testimonials from Greenwood Farmers’ Market vendors  
Michelle Shutty, Greenwood Bean  
“Without the Greenwood Food Sovereignty  ordinance, my small coffee roasting business may have 
never gotten off the ground. The ordinance gave me a chance to quickly and easily introduce my product 
to customers in my community at the local farmers' market, and allowed me to determine that there was 
enough demand and interest to warrant starting the business, before putting forth the effort of getting 
licensed. I have since become licensed as a home processor and mobile vendor, but probably wouldn't 
have made that leap without the ordinance.”  
Amy -Wight Chapman, Amy’s Bakehouse  
“I had a commercial kitchen license and a second kitchen dedicated to the bakery when I ran it out of my 
home. I gave it up because I was putting in too many hours for too little pay and I needed a job with 
regular pay and h ealth insurance. However, the licensing regulations were definitely a deterrent to doing 
any baking part -time on the side while working at other jobs. After I closed the bakery, I often had 
people ask me if I would bake something for them, and had to tell them no, because I no longer had a 
license.  
 
Having the ability to bake in my home kitchen and sell products directly to customers without going 
through the licensing process has made it possible for me to bake and sell at the weekly Greenwood 
Farmers' Mar ket. Without our town's food sovereignty ordinance, I wouldn't be participating in the 
market.  
 
I love the flexibility of the Greenwood Farmers' Market, which makes it possible for me to participate 
when I am able, and to take a week or more off if I have other commitments. I also love the fact that it is 
right across the street from my house. It's been wonderful getting to know the other vendors, and I 
always go home from the market with high -quality local products I've purchased from several other 
vendors . And I love meeting my customers and building up a "fan club" for my baked goods!”  
 
 
