Jared Bornstein Representing Operation Reboot Outdoors Testimony in support of LD 126 
Good afternoon and thank you to the Chairs and members for having a hearing on this 
important issue. Winter ticks in Maine are a present danger to our Moose population, tradition 
of hunting and economy. If you have ever ran into a nest, like I have, you know how disgusting 
they are as well. This issue certainly warrants all the effort and resources allocated by the 
department, as well as the cooperation of the hunting community 
The means by which the study is reducing the population of Moose is by increasing 
permits in one area of zone 4 and comparing the reduced population to a control section where 
permits remain the same. As such, the portion of zone 4 that has had a population reduction 
due to increased hunting activity has seen a drastic drop in successful hunts. No wonder, less 
moose, harder hunt. Compounding this dynamic is that the Moose that are left are what we 
hunters call "educated." They know the common strategies employed by hunters. This means 
that they change their behavior to be more nocturnal, they are less reliably in cuts that provide 
opportunity for hunters to get a clean shot, they more frequent thick and swampy areas that 
are both hard to hunt and also hard to retrieve an 800-pound animal from. Many hunters will 
not even go into those areas because they know they probably can't pull the moose out even if 
they do get one. I was on two moose hunts this year, one in zone 4 and one in zone 5. On the 
September zone 5 hunt we regularly saw fresh tracks in the road, we saw moose 4 days in a row 
(3 bulls, 1 cow) and I was able to call a good bull in to 30 yards for the hunters on Thursday 
morning. Over all fantastic hunt! In zone 4 during the October hunt we saw 1 cow on the drive 
in, no real fresh tracks in the road, no bulls, but a whole lot of hunters. It was pretty defeating. 
My friend who was with the veteran and I on the hunt has been hunting moose for 30+ years 
and was amazed at how difﬁcult the hunt was. We were unsuccessful. The hunter wasa 
veteran that someone donated the permit to, I was the one who facilitated that. lfl could do it 
again, I would refuse it. Not because I don't think we should go on the hunt, but because I felt 
responsible for taking this veteran on a hunt with a lower probability of success thanI 
understood and preventing him from being allowed to draw a tag for 3 years. 
This is not a problem of the department educating on the probability of success, they do 
that for sure. Our group 100% met the experienced/capable hunting group that the 
Departments disclaimer says you should be before accepting one of these permits. I have been 
on a number of Moose hunts and never been unsuccessful. Unfortunately for the Veteran, that 
was his ﬁrst moose hunt and he was unsuccessful. Operation Reboot Outdoors sponsored 3 
veterans on adaptive hunts, all were unsuccessful. ORO's overall success rate excluding 
adaptive hunts was 7/8 on harvests and 8/8 on opportunity. On all three adaptive hunts, no one 
saw a cow. 
The spirit of this bill is fairness. These hunters are participating in a scientific study 
aimed at reducing the moose population, it is not a normal hunt and so the normal cooling off 
period after receiving a permit is not fair. By eliminating that cooling off period the committee 
can make the hunt more fair and actually incentivize experienced hunters to apply for and take 
the permits ensuring that the department gets the best data possible by having their study area 
hunted by the same level of hunter as their control area. I appreciate your time, and would 
answer any questions the committee may have.
