,\_ \- 
Testimony of the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. 126 
”An Act to Improve the Fairness of Adaptive Management Study 
Moose Hunt Permits by Exempting Those Permittees from the 4- 
year Limitation on Receiving Another Permit" 
Presented By: Senator POULIOT of Kennebec 
Date of Hearing: February 13, 2023 
l &» 5 J1 QL at . , _ , 11,
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee. I am Jim Connolly, Bureau of Resource Management Director for the Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for nor against L.D. 126. 
This bill exempts permittees who received a permit for an adaptive management study moose hunt 
between 2019 and 2025 and were unsuccessful in harvesting a moose from the requirement thata 
person who receives a moose hunting permit is ineligible to obtain another permit for 4 years. 
In 2021, the Department established the adaptive moose hunt in the western portion of WMD 4 to 
determine whether an increase in harvest of antlerless moose can reduce the impacts of winter ticks. 
This hunt is one component of a much larger, decade-long research program to better understand the 
health and status of Maine's moose population and find solutions to the winter tick issue. The basic 
premise behind the adaptive hunt is that by reducing the density of the host (moose), we may be able to 
reduce the prevalence of the parasite (winter ticks) enough to improve the health and productivity of 
moose. 
This hunt was specifically designed to be ‘adaptive, ’ in that results will be constantly monitored and used 
to inform future changes in how the hunt is structured. The Department is currently evaluating data 
from the first two years of the adaptive hunt, including results from aerial helicopter surveys, GPS 
collared moose, ovary collections, hunter success, and other parameters. This review will indicate 
whether any changes to law or rule are required to meet our research goals. Therefore, we would ask 
that the committee hold the work session on this bill until later in the session, so we have time to 
evaluate the impacts of this bill, as well as come back with any other recommended statute changes for 
the committee's consideration. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session. 
Page1
