Tyler Brown
Vassalboro
LD 126
Dear respected members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Legislative Committee,
My name is Tyler Brown and I am testifying in opposition to LD 126, An Act to 
Improve the Fairness of Adaptive Management Study Moose Hunt Permits by 
Exempting Those Permittees from the 4-year Limitation on Receiving Another 
Permit.
Maine's moose hunt with the largest herd in the lower 48 states, is one of the most 
coveted in the United States. Many hunters, including Maine residents, wait decades 
for the opportunity to pursue one of these animals. Hunters engage in this hunt 
knowing full well that they cannot enter the lottery again regardless of they fill their 
tag or not. 
The adaptive 5 year study, is a temporary measure to test if lowering the moose 
population ratio per square mile in one zone will improve the health of the moose 
herd overall. Those participants who choose this zone understand they have far better 
odds of drawing a tag compared to the other zones. Maine also allows the transfer of 
moose tags between recipients and allows for monetary exchange as an incentive for 
transfers.
Exempting recipients of tags for the adaptive study who are unsuccessful, will not 
"Improve the Fairness". On the contrary, it will provide those with a better chance of 
drawing a tag the ability to enter the lottery the following year should they not fill 
their antlerless tag. This bill sets a bad precedent, with future legislations arguing that 
where the adaptive hunters who are not successful can enter the following year, why 
shouldn't all tag recipients who are unsuccessful be allowed to enter the lottery the 
following year.
This bill with its future implications of application to all unsuccessful moose hunters, 
will only lead to lowering the odds for those hunters who did not draw. Instead of 
improving fairness, this bill will decrease the fairness of the moose lottery. 
I thank you for your time in reading my testimony and your service to our state.
Tyler Brown

