 
Heather Manchester, MSAD 17, President 
Niki Chan, RSU 24, President Elect 
Deb Taylor, RSU 12, Treasurer 
Joanne Dowd, RSU 23, Secretary  
Debra McIntyre, Executive Director 
 
      
Testimony of Debra McIntyre, Executive Director, on behalf of the members of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association, testifying in opposition to LD 1084 An Act to Enhance 
Wildlife Conservation Efforts and Preserve Sporting Heritage by Making the Elements of 
a Hunter Safety Course a Part of Public School Curriculum.  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Debra McIntyre, and I am the Executive Director of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association. On behalf of the members of MCLA, I offer testimony in 
opposition to LD 1084 An Act to Enhance Wildlife Conservation Efforts and Preserve Sporting 
Heritage by Making the Elements of a Hunter Safety Course as Part of Public School 
Curriculum.  
 
A firearms hunter safety course is a valuable course and legally required for any student who 
chooses to hunt.  This course requires a trained, certified instructor that meets state and 
international standards.  The course requires a 3-hour session of classroom instruction, 
completing a workbook and attending an 8-hour skill and exam session and successfully 
earning a passing score on the exam.  In addition, if students are under the age of 16, they must 
be accompanied by a parent at the training sessions.   
 
Based on this information, we cannot support this proposal in any way.  For those students who 
want to hunt, it is already in state statute that they must take a hunter safety course, but this 
does not fall under the realm of public schools.  The Maine Learning Results continue to drive 
the essential instruction that schools must provide to all students and the components of a 
hunter safety course are not in alignment with the MLR’s.   
 
We also believe that this would yet be another unfunded mandate for all schools with many 
questions to answer. Who would teach this course?  Would public school staff be required to 
teach this course and if so, how would they be trained?  We also don’t believe that the specifics 
of a hunter safety course are applicable to all schools across the state nor to all students. As 
stated, there are avenues for students and families to pursue if they are interested in a hunter 
safety course without mandating it be taught in our public schools. 
For these reasons, MCLA is opposed to LD 1084. 
Thank you for your time.  
