A HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE Housn STATION 
AUGUSTA,MA1NE 04333-0002 
,@;~@,- (207) 287-1440 
5' 'ITY: (207) 2874469 
Donald J. Ardell 
P.O Box 320 
Monticello ME, 04760 
Residence: (207) 521-1 130 
Donald Arde1l@legislature.maine. gov 
March 29, 2023 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Education, co-chairs Senator Rafferty and Representative 
Brennan, and esteemed members of the committee, I offer my thanks for taking the time to allow 
me to introduce LD 1084, "An Act to Enhance Wildlife Conservation Efforts and Preserve 
Sporting Heritage by Making the Elements of a Hunter Safety Course a Part of Public School 
Curriculum" . The bi1l’s concept includes a nuanced relationship of education, legislation, and 
conservation dating back to the beginning of the 20th Century that has made the U.S., and Maine, 
a world leader in wildlife conservation and habitat management. My name is Donny Ardell, andI 
represent House District 6. 
Maine is renowned for its sporting opportunities. But that reputation was earned, and was not 
always the case; in the early part of the 20th Century, wildlife habitat depletion, largely through 
mechanized farming and irresponsible forestry techniques, put Maine’s once-abundant wildlife in 
severe decline, with fear of some species, such as moose, disappearing altogether. Congress 
understood that and in 193 7, the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act, 16 USC 669, commonly 
known as the Pittman-Robertson Act, was enacted. Pittman-Robertson redirected an existing 
11% federal excise tax on the wholesale price of shotguns, rifles, and ammunition, and a 10% tax 
on handguns, to U.S. states for conservation efforts such as wildlife management, habitat 
improvement, and hunter education. After the excise tax has been collected, Pittman-Robertson 
funds are allocated to U.S. states by the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, in part through matching 
funds provided as grants for state-managed wildlife restoration projects. State buy-in to those 
projects eligible for the grants can be as low as 25%, with Pittman-Robertson funds fulﬁlling the 
remaining 75%, creating a 3:1 ratio of federal to state funds. Those state funds used to access 
Pittman-Robertson allocations are typically sourced through hunting license fees paid to the state, 
as well as fees on tags for additional game opportunities or game species, such as antlerless deer 
tags or tagging fees. Through this allocation method, any given U.S. state is limited to no more 
than 5% and no less than one half of 1% of total Pittman-Robertson allocations, which last year 
were $1.4 Billion. That’s a lot to take in, but the main takeaway is that any given U.S. State’s» 
access to critical wildlife conservation funds hinge on sportsmen and women buying licenses. 
But those license sales are dropping; with fewer licensed hunters, Maine loses the ability to 
access that matching Pittman-Robertson funding for wildlife conservation, and loses funding to 
acquire and manage critical wildlife habitat to other states. 
The Maine Hunter Safety Course is necessary training to be able to acquire a license as a 16- 
year-old or older, and when passed is valid for life. The course covers numerous topics such as 
concepts of habitat and modern wildlife conservation, survival/ ﬁrst aid, landowner relations, 
hunter ethics, Maine hunting laws, hands-on practice of safe firearms handling, hands-on 
instruction of map and compass and outdoor survival, and information about game species 
biology and ecology. While some of the information is hunting-speci ﬁc, much, or even most of it 
House District 6
is necessary to know in an emergency, or to avoid being in an emergency in the ﬁrst place. Best 
of all, the course certiﬁcation never expires and is valid for life. In fact, I knew a college 
professor who had taken the course as a youth, and never used it until in her 50s she became an 
avid upland bird hunter after rescuing a bird dog who needed the exercise. 
The classroom materials are published, and there’s a provision for much of it to be optionally 
conducted online. The safety course materials are funded through the very Pittman-Robertson 
Act matching funds that the license fees are able to unlock, and trained instructors already exist. 
From someone who volunteered to ﬁll in full-day blocks of applied constitutional law 
presentations to Houlton High students, I can say the teachers wouldn’t mind the break. Teaching 
the course in schools is a small investment that can provide big conservation payoffs. 
But I ask myself the question: ‘Do schools really need to be mandated to teach something else?’ 
and, ‘What is the role of local control? ’ The answers are that this is more than just another 
mandate, and a fu'st step, with a lifetime ticket in-hand, to engaging in Maine’s natural world with 
an informed and conservationally-grounded mindset. It is a ticket so valuable it both protects and 
enhances our natural resources while providing the holder a lifetime challenge that can, if you’re 
patient, good, and lucky, provide clean, free-range table fare for your friends and family, or for 
food pantries through the ‘Hunters for the Hungry’ program. And all that is aside from the 
friendships forged, and the thrill of engaging Maine’s natural beauty away from a screen. 
In closing, education about conservation, the Maine Hunter Safety Course, and the associated 
federal funding that it is both funded by and provides access to, is a program in its eighty~sixth 
year that has reintroduced the wild turkey and allowed Maine’s moose to thrive. It’s a feedback 
loop of education, engagement, and funding that is in danger of losing steam. Making the course 
a part of Maine’s school curriculum strengthens a critical part of that relationship, and provides 
an opportunity, a golden ticket, for a lifetime of challenge and natural engagement in Maine’s 
forests. 
Thank you for your time, and careful consideration of this bill. 
Sincerely, 
Donald J. Ardell 
State Representative 
House District 6
Fir-eanm-s il-il=uin"ter -‘Safety 
Taking a lhunter safety course is the ‘lirst step lo joining a wonderful community of 
conservationists! Hunters lhave a ‘longstanding mole as conservationists, helping keep wildlife 
populations -at healthy levels and giving biologists valuable newest data. Hunters also ‘provide 
funding for wildliie management -through the purchase of their ‘license and .a manufactureiwpaid 
tax on ﬁrearms and ammunition. ‘Without hunters, it would not be possible for the department to 
closely monitor and protect game and inon-game species in our state. 
Hunting is the ultimate way to eonneotwlth our state's fantastic resources, bond with friends and 
family, and bring -home -exoellentltatile Kare. Maine otters some of the best hunting opportunities in the oourrlry. With ‘over 17 million acres of 
-extraordinary land and waterways, there's so many -opﬁons to explore. Here ls what you need ‘to know to get started by completing -your 
ﬁrearms hunter safety course. 
ﬁrearm hunter salety-oourses are available in two rdltferenliorrnals: online and traditional. . 
Oniline 
‘Students 1'5 and older can complete the firearms safety course onllne at hunter-edoom/maine. i'he cost to register for 
the online course is $24.95. Upon -successful completion oi the online course, students can use their course completion 
vouoher fhunteroducation canal) to purchase a Maine ﬁrearm hunting ﬁoense gating or from a ﬁoensing agent (such asa 
town oﬂioe or sporting goods store). Students are welcome to attend an in~person skills and exam session after 
oornpleting the -onﬁne course to obtain further skills and imormation if desired. 
Please .note;'-students ages 110-1:5 may complete the online course, b.ut.to become fully loerrtflied are required to than 
attend an Jmpemo/2 skills and exam session. Please see the junior hunting section of the Maine Hunting Laws lbrmore 
J‘!- 1fom1ation =abeut_juniorl2un:ter¢requirem ems. 
Start New 
iliradiliional 
iiraditional in-person courses are available to all students and are itaug ht toy trained, certiﬁed volunteerinstvuotors who 
rneet state -and -intemational standards. Volunteer instructors provide valuatile information to new hunters including 
insight into the sport oi hunting, resources and support. lln-person -courses iprovide students the -opportunityto ask 
-questions of instructors and gain iurmer guidance. i|'her»e is typically lno ltee to oomplete a traditional in-person course, 
-although some -oourse lhosts require a nominal fee to ill9lpt0OVBl'1HCllllY rental or cleaning costs. 
lln-person courses require -students to attend a 3-hour session of olassroom instruction, then -eompletea workbook at 
home and ‘then attend a skills and exam session. 
Find aTraditional Course
Skills and Exam Sessiozms 
® =8 hours of classroom lnslruotion -on the rfollow itoplcs: 
- Suwivall ﬁrsl a'id 
- lLandowner-relations 
- Humler ethics 
- lMaine‘hunlin,g llaws 
- llllamds-on lpraﬁlice ofsafe "ﬁrearms lhandling 
- ll-liands-om ﬁnslruclion of lmap and compass androuldoonsur-vfwal 
.¢<l'lhe skills and ‘exam session, students musl -demonstrate Ito me inslnuolor "thal ithey can safely handle .a rflraarm, and 
must panflcipale in -‘workshop and session aollvllies, bring e ;sur.v‘|va‘l lkltand pass a 59-question exam with 2 score -of at 
least 10%. 
Onllne course completion or paper imanudllworkbooklmust be completed to attend lthe Skills & Exam day. Paper 
MHHUBT/MIO ﬂ|€bQ0k‘W1||ibEll ‘ﬂi"Qdll-[POl ‘llIB§i5tIZ “OlI iif preferred . _(=wi|l be askeﬁ lto choose nriline -or 
nranuallwonkbonkwheu rregislerlng 1'or1:he class‘). 
Fmd a Skllls and Exam Session 
Junior Hunters: Tthﬁ Department encourages all jur-llorlhunlars ages 10-115 icxoomplete a hunlersafety course to 
Jurlheriheir lknowladgeof safe rhunlingjlproperflrearm lharrdling, outdoor sun/fiural, and more. Students mustbe at 
leasllken years rold in-attend the nourse, students under 1'6 yearsrofagemust be accompanied iby a parent-or , 
aguardian. Leam more about iuriorhunterlicense lequirerneng, i ~'
~ K ‘ ‘ 
Taike 'iﬂ|T|1E lnext st-ep! 
-Completing we hunter salely course is just the ﬁrst step toward e ’life-‘long journey of leaming and being a safe and 
successful hunter. Enhance your ‘skills and boost your eomﬁclenoe with -one of -our many next step opportunities. Whether 
you want to leann more about llluntlng e certain species, meed more pmolloe with your method of harvest, orjust want an 
opportunity "to ask questions and conneot with other hunter-s, our next step workshops are the perfect place "lo start. 
Le-am more
