Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition  
LD 1084: An Act to Enhance Wildlife Con servation  Efforts and Preserve Sporting Heritage by 
Making the Elements of a Hunter Safety Course a P art of Public School C urriculum   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Education and Cultura l Affairs  Committee  
March  29, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee,   
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 1084, An Act to Enhance Wildlife 
Conservation Efforts and P reserve Sporting Heritage by Making the Elements of a Hunter Safety Course 
a Part of Public School Curriculum.   
 
This session, this Committee can expect a multitude of bills mandating curricula onto public schools and 
other various mandates that directly impact the school day of students and educators.  Already the 
Committee has held public hearings mandating 30 minutes of recess for certain students, 30 minutes of 
lunch for all students, requiring instruction of the United States Constitution, among other s, and it is 
only March.  Over the next several weeks, we can expect additional bills regarding personal finance, 
more on  Wabanaki studies, and other various curriculum mandates.  Given the breadth of considerations 
this session, we would ask the Committee to consider holding all curricula mandates and other mandates 
that impact the school day to the end of the session to get a full understanding of what additional items 
are being asked of public schools in Maine.   
 
Our opposition to LD 1084 is twofold.   
 
First, we are certainly concerned about the mandate contained in this bill.  This bill mandates firearm 
hunter safety as a graduation requirement for all Maine’s students.  It is important to note, this 
committee has already held a public hearing to requir e physical education and health as a graduation 
requirement.  Furthermore, foreign language, computer science and other subjects are currently not 
covered under the state’s required graduation standards.  LD 1084 conjures the question – what should 
we requ ire for graduation?   
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the bill calls for “[h]ands -on practice of safe firearms handling.”  We believe this 
requirement in the bill is contrary  to the prohibition on firearms in schools found in Title 20 -A, Section 
6552.  That provision of law  has some carveouts for specific purposes, but those do not appear to apply 
to the types  of hands -on handling of firearms on school property  called for in this bill .   
 
Lastly, the issue of guns has grown controversial in recent years, due in large part to  the gun violence 
epidemic in our country.  This bill attempts to impose firearm safety onto all students, even those 
students who may hold strong feelings about firearms.  I would hope foreign languages are not 
controversial subjects .  The same with compu ter science and health and physical education.  Obviously, 
if a mandate such as one called for in LD 1084 were ever enacted, we can expect  vociferous reactions in 
some communities.   
 
Instead we hope parents will talk to their children about firearms  and s afe hunting practices .  In fact, 
many schools already operate gun  safety  awareness programs in schools.  Young students are taught 
what to do when they find a gun unattended.  We hope parents who hunt and keep guns in their home 
will take the time with their children, like generations before, and teach their children about gun  safety 
and safe hunting practices.   
 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine.  I will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have.   
 
 
