    
  
   JANET T. MILLS  
              GOVERNOR  
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF  
INLAND FI SHERIES & WILDLIFE  
353 WATER STREET  
41 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA ME  04333 -0041                       
                       
                        JUDITH CAMUSO  
                                     COMMISSIONER  
 
 
 
 
PHONE: (207) 287 -8000  FISH AND WILDL IFE ON THE WEB:  
Mefishwildlife. com EMAIL ADDRESS:  
info.ifw@maine.gov  
 
                                                                                                 
Date:   March 2 8, 2023  
 
To:   Senator, Joseph Rafferty , Chair  
Representative , Michael Brennan , Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
  
From: Judith Camuso , Commissioner of Inland Fisheries & Wi ldlife  
 
Subject: Letter in lieu of testimony  regarding L.D. 10 84 “An Act to Enhance Wildlife Conservation 
Efforts and Preserve Sporting Heritage by Making the Elements of a Hunter Safety Course a Part of 
Public School Curriculum ” 
 
 
Dear Committee Member s, 
 
The Department is neither for nor against  LD 1084, “An Act to Enhance Wildlife Conservation Efforts and 
Preserve Sporting Heritage by Making the Elements of a Hunter Safety Course a Part of Public School 
Curriculum ”.  
 
There are over 230,000 people who are licensed to hunt i n the state of Maine, an increase of 10% from 
ten years ago, and up 3% from last year. Hunters are required to pass a hunter safety course to hunt in 
Maine, making hunting one of the safest outdoor re creational sports.  
 
The Department is responsible for t he delivery, oversight, and management of Maine’s hunter education 
program. This program consists of standardized courses for firearms, bow hunter, crossbow hunter, and 
trapper education. The curricul a are based on standards set by the International Hunter  Education 
Association, the International Bowhunter Education Foundation, and the Association of Fish and 
Wildlife Agencies. As interest continues to grow in hunting, the Department now offers three d elivery 
methods for hunter education that include: onlin e, hybrid ( home study and in -person portions ), and the 
full traditional in -person course, each averaging  a total of  10-12 hours of instruction. Approximately 
12,000  people complete a hunter safety cou rse (firearms, bow hunter and crossbow)  each year  and 
nearly 70% of the participants are 18 -30 years of age.  
 
In-person courses are led by certified  volunteer instructors across the state. Many of which are 
associated with an organized fish and game club, adult ed program, or civic organization.  Certified 
Instructors must meet several requirements to be eligible to instruct, teach, or assist in the de livery of 
these courses. Requirements include but are not limited to three years of prior experience in the 
discipline the instructor wishes to teach, prior succes sful completion of the course discipline, and a 
criminal background check . Once certified, in structors are required to attend trainings at least once every 
two years to maintain certification.  
 
For most, becoming a hunter, trapper or angler is a lengthy p rocess that requires a keen interest in the 
activity as well as a solid social support networ k to gain all the necessary skills to be successful. Safety 
courses are an important first step of the process and ensure students learn to be ethical, safe, and l egal 
in the Maine outdoors, but they are only one part of the process. Students who are requi red to complete a 
hunter safety course who do not have a supportive social network or the personal interest in the activity 
are not as likely to continue to engage  in the process of becoming an active  or lifelong  participant . For 
those students who do have  the interest, hunter education programs are currently  available to them in 
multiple formats  once they reach the age of 10. Additionally, the Department offers sev eral ongoing 
education programs for youth including camps offered in partnership with the Uni versity of Maine 
Cooperative Extension, and many  “Next Step” Learn to Hunt workshops in  partnership with local 
community organizations and fish and game clubs. The Department also supports a number of  existing  
public -school  programs that offer outdoor lear ning opportunities through outing clubs  or extracurricular 
offerings.   
 
While providing  hunter  safety courses to young students in Maine would provide a meaningfu l learning 
opportunity, th e Department recognizes that th e requirement to offer these courses  may impose high 
implementation costs . There would be a need for the school systems to obtain all the necessary 
equipment to support classwork  and supplemental  activities and  would require specialized training for 
teachers and staff to achieve and maintain  certification to deliver approved safety course materials.  
 
 
 
 
 
