Scott Lindsay
Wilton
LD 1084
Note: this written testimony is for LD 1002. 
Dear Members of the Committee on Educational & Cultural Affairs,
I recently became aware of LD 1002, so I apologize for not submitting my comments 
during the public hearing last week. This bill piqued my interest as there have been 
several conversations I have had with my children about this very subject over the last
15 years.  My son and daughter have an 8 year age difference and have gone through 
the same school system, Mt. Blue Regional School District. Overall, it has been very 
positive. The lunch issue has occasionally come up during that recap of the day when 
I get home from work and we discuss how school went. Over the course of the school 
day, it seems that lunch time is lumped in with the bus ride back and forth as the least 
enjoyable. As for the lunch, my kids have both said it is always rushed and somewhat 
chaotic. The kids are encouraged not to talk too much with their friends and focus on 
eating. I understand that. Even with kids that are focused on the task at hand, I am 
convinced that the lunch period is too short in duration to allow most of the kids to 
finish the meal or even to attempt to consume much of it. Most of the time, I pack the 
kid's a bagged lunch. I clean out their bag at the end of the day and most of the food, 
some home made, some packaged, comes back. It is  a pretty good lunch, too! I then 
ask them if they wouldn't prefer a nice hot lunch on occasion; maybe on days when 
pizza or chicken pot pie is on the menu. Their response has consistently been by the 
time we get there, line up, get served and take our seat, there is usually less than 5 
minutes left before the lunch period ends. In our middle school, the kids go out to 
recess after lunch, so that could exacerbate the problem. As adults, there are time 
when we have to skip lunch or make it a quick one and we can live with it, but I think 
for kids, who are growing and have young bodies that are being challenged physically
and mentally most of the day, I think it is even more important to have a good 
mid-day meal. Also remember that for many students, their active day does not end at 
the close of school. Many continue on to sports practice, theater rehearsals, orchestra 
practice, town sponsored athletic events, and for older students, work. Shoving an 
extra granola bar or apple in their bag is not a meal replacement. A significant number
of students are also growing up in food insecure environments. I think this problem 
has grown over the last few decades as fewer parents are home with their kids in the 
morning when kids are leaving the home. That extra 10 minutes to finish a lunch 
would be very welcome by most kids. I have brought this up with administration and 
the response always is about disruption of an already tight school day schedule. I 
understand that concern. I think it is valid. In response, I think the staff should 
consider the options on how to trim a little time here or there to make up the extra 10 
minutes to provide a 30 minute lunch. When I discussed this bill with my 11 year old, 
she said she would be worried that the extra 10 minutes would mean a shorter recess 
period. I would hope not, as this is also an important time for kids to be active and 
social, which is what kids do. I understand the school day is only so long and I am a 
strong advocate for prioritizing academics, the arts and technical skills, but it is my 
opinion that students do best when their minds and bodies are charged and ready to 
go. I think three meals a day is a big part of that. I can take care of breakfast and 
dinner, school should allow 30 minutes for lunch.
Respectfully Submitted for your Consideration,
Scott Lindsay
134 Fenderson Hill Road
Wilton, ME 
207-500-6805
Scott.lindsay@myfairpoint.net
