 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  May 10, 2023  
 
RE:  SUPPORT – LD 1728 , "An Act to Ensure Access to Federally Approved Opioid 
Overdose-reversing Medication" 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest and oldest professional physician association 
representing over 4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.  
 
Maine’s physicians, particularly addiction medicine specialists, support LD 1728, claiming 
widespread access to opioid overdose reversal medication has/can/will help prevent more 
deadly drug overdoses as the opioid epidemic continues to devastate Maine families and 
communities.i 
 
Naloxone/Narcan History 
• In 1971, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved using naloxone to treat 
overdoses. 
• Paramedics and hospitals have been using naloxone to reverse opioid overdoses for 
decades. 
• Naloxone is also referred to as “Narcan”, the brand name for nasal spray naloxone.ii 
 
Naloxone  is a life-saving medication that can reverse an overdose from opioids—including 
heroin, fentanyl, and prescription opioid medications. There are two forms of naloxone that 
anyone can use without medical training or authorization: prefilled nasal spray and injectable. 
 
Naloxone quickly reverses an overdose by blocking the effects of opioids. It can restore 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 normal breathing within 2 to 3 minutes in a person whose breath has slowed, or even 
stopped, as a result of opioid overdose. More than one dose of naloxone may be 
required when stronger opioids like fentanyl are involved. iii 
 
Thankfully, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration recently approved selling Naloxone over the 
counter, without a prescription, potentially making it available alongside pain relievers, allergy 
medications, and antacids, etc.  r, marking the first time an opioid treatment drug will be available 
without a prescription.  
 
Examples why LD 1728 is needed 
 
• The FDA approved Purdue Pharma’s drug application for nalmefene hydrochloride 
injection, in 2022.iv Nalmefene is an opioid antagonist for the complete or partial reversal 
of opioid drug effects, including respiratory depression.  
 
• Earlier this year, the FDA accepted for review a New Drug Application (NDA) from Opiant 
(later acquired by Indivior, the company best known for producing Suboxone) 
Pharmaceuticals for another nasal nalmefene delivery product for the treatment of opioid 
overdose.v 
 
LD 1728 will allow Maine to provide additional solutions to the formidable and rapidly evolving 
opioid crisis with urgency when new drug treatments are available. 
 
Thank you for your attention to our comments. We urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
 
i Yale Medicine, How Can Over-the-Counter Naloxone Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths?, 
https://www.yalemedicine.org/news/naloxone-narcan-prevent-opioid-overdose-deaths , accessed May 5,2023  
ii Massachusetts Bureau of Substance Addiction Services: https://www.mass.gov/service-details/naloxone-facts-
and-
formulations#:~:text=In%201971%2C%20the%20Food%20and,name%20for%20nasal%20spray%20naloxone . 
Accessed, May 10, 2023 
iii US CDC, Lifeaving Naloxone : https://www.cdc.gov/stopoverdose/naloxone/index.html , accessed May 9, 2023  
iv US Food and Drug Administration, Competitive Generic Therapy Approvals, https://www.fda.gov/drugs/generic-
drugs/competitive-generic-therapy-approvals , accessed May 9, 2023  
v Drug Topics, FDA Grants Priority Review Designation to OPNT003 Nasal Nalmefene for Opioid Overdose , 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
  
https://www.drugtopics.com/view/fda-grants-priority-review-designation-to-opnt003-nasal-nalmefene-for-opioid-
overdose , accessed May 9, 2023  
