 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Sr. Clinical Director 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT  
LD 1728, An Act to Ensure Access to Federally Approved Opioid Overdose-reversing Medication 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports 
the passage of An Act to Ensure Access to Federally Approved Opioid Overdose-reversing 
Medication. Governor Janet Mills reported that there were 10,110 overdoses in the State of 
Maine in 2022. Of these deaths, it is reported that there was a survival rate of 93% largely due 
to the availability of opiate reversal medications.   
Opiate reversal medications bind to the opiate receptors in the central nervous system. When 
this occurs, there is a rapid removal of opiates that are bound to these receptors, essentially 
acting as a magnet, grabbing and removing the opiates, effectively removing the lethal 
substances from the system. Having access to all forms of potentially lifesaving medications 
saves lives. A national study noted that 84.3% of individuals who received opiate reversal 
medications were still alive one year later. This demonstrates that access to medications saves 
the lives of our neighbors.  
There are multiple opiate reversal medications that are available, both generic and name 
brand. By providing greater access to the available medications and not restricting to a specific 
medication, individuals will be provided greater access and choices to life saving medications. 
Because of this, NAMI Maine supports the passage of LD 1728.  
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
 
