295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1728 
“An Act to Ensure Access to Federally Approved Opioid  
Overdose-reversing Medication” 
Sponsored by Senator Moore 
May 10, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy, and I 
am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community-based mental health and substance use treatment 
providers, providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. 
The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-
based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our 
behavioral health care system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1728, “An 
Act to Ensure Access to Federally Approved Opioid Overdose-reversing 
Medication.” This proposal adds other opioid overdose-reversing medications to 
statutes governing naloxone hydrochloride. Naloxone has been shown to be 
highly effective in preventing overdose deaths. In addition to naloxone, there are 
other FDA-approved medications that can reverse opioid overdose. 
 
Ensuring access to other FDA-approved opioid overdose-reversing medications 
could potentially save more lives and provide an additional tool for healthcare 
providers and first responders to combat the opioid epidemic.  
 
Opioid addiction is a serious public health crisis that has led to a significant 
increase in overdose deaths in recent years. We are losing more than two 
Mainers a day to accidental overdose. It is important to provide individuals who 
are struggling with addiction and those who may be at risk of an overdose with 
as many options as possible to ensure that they receive the care and treatment 
they need.  
 
It is crucial that policymakers and healthcare professionals continue to support 
access to naloxone and other effective overdose-reversing medications to 
combat the opioid crisis and save lives. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of this legislation. 
I urge committee members to vote ought to pass.  
 ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Brighter Heights Maine 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties Mental Health
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Concepts, Inc. 
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
KidsPeace Maine
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Pathways of Maine
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Rumford Group Homes
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

