Janet T_ “ms Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Govemor _ *3, Maiire Center" for Disease Control and Prevention 
ll State House Station 
.1 i 
WI. L- h Ph.D. . ' 286 Wm" S""'“ 
(,"(;‘I::‘:i;SiOn; ‘;“ re“ Augusta, Maine 04333-uori 
7:£"7" Tel; (207) 287-80l6; Fax (207) 287~9058 
TTY: Dial 71} (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 73, An Act to Require Bottled Water Companies to Monitor for 
Pezﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances 
Hearing Date: April 28, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Amy Lachance and I am the Program Manager for the 
Drinking Water Program within the Department of Health and Human Services Maine Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC). I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of 
the Maine CDC and will be speaking in support of LD 73, An Act to Require Bottled Water 
Companies to Monitor for Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances. 
LD 73 requires water bottlers to conduct PF AS sampling of bottled water and to conduct 
additional monitoring if PFAS is detected above the standard applicable to community water 
systems. The bill also imposes reporting, treatment, and notice requirements on any person that 
extracts water in this State to be sold as bottled water. The Maine CDC offers the following 
comments for the Committee ’s consideration. 
The Drinking Water Program (DWP) supports the proposed legislation requiring water bottlers 
to test their product for PF AS. If enacted, the DWP will work with the State’s 21 water bottlers 
to ensure that these provisions are met. Most water bottlers have already voluntarily tested their 
water for PFAS, and the DWP has requested the submission of these results. All submitted 
results were below the interim standard of 20 parts per trillion (ppt) for the combination of six 
PFAS compounds. One result contained detectable levels of regulated PFAS (combined level of 
7 ppt), and that water bottler is in the process of installing treatment to reduce PFAS levels. By 
requiring PFAS monitoring by water bottlers, LD 73 provides additional measures that further 
DWP efforts to ensure public water systems provide safe drinking water and protect public 
health. As written, LD 73 names ﬁve of the six PFAS contaminants regulated under current 
Maine law. The Maine CDC recommends, and respectfully requests, that the legislation be 
amended to include a sixth PFAS contaminant, perﬂuorodecanoic acid. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I am happy to address questions from the Committee, and I will be available to participate 
in any work sessions held for LD 73.
