Re:  Support of LD 73 and LD 1248 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Ziegler and HHS Committee Members, 
As a board-certified Pediatrician, I am very concerned about exposure to PFAS.  I am especially 
concerned about the exposure of infants, toddlers, children and that of pregnant women and 
women of reproductive age. As you know, Maine has considerable contamination. In retrospect, 
much of the contamination was clearly preventable. 
The effects of exposure to PFAS are not acute but chronic. At any one time the exposure may 
be small, but over time the vast multitude of the individual exposures build up from these 
“forever” chemicals and can have a great deleterious impact (cumulative effect). Effects strongly 
linked to fetal exposure are low birth weight (starting off in life with a great “handicap”), and 
immune abnormalities such as reduced response to vaccines for the common but preventable 
childhood diseases.  Small studies (that have to be confirmed) demonstrate later 
neurodevelopmental problems. Children are at great risk of exposure to contaminated fluids 
because of their increased activity and metabolism. They need greater water consumption in 
relation to their body weight than adults. Transplacental transfer of PFAS confers a substantial 
burden to the fetus and newborn.  Breast feeding has been shown to further increase the body 
burden. 
 As age increases along with exposure, thyroid dysfunction, kidney and liver disease and cancer 
are linked with PFAS exposure. During pregnancy not only can the fetus be affected, but the 
mother can have problems with hypertension including preeclampsia.  Although controlled 
epidemiologic studies are very difficult, animal models clearly demonstrate the toxic effects of 
low dosage PFAS exposure over time. 
Great effort must be taken to mitigate exposure to these “forever” chemicals. Water is the key 
pathway of exposure, especially in pediatrics. All water consumed must be carefully regulated. 
That bottled water is less regulated than tap water is a significant public health concern. Bottled 
water must be strictly tested, monitored, and reported to the consumer.  LD 73 and 1248 are 
vital for accountability, transparency and, most important, protection of the public’s health. 
I urge the committee to pass these bills. 
Thank you for your consideration.  
Bruce Taylor, MD, FAAP                                                                                                                      
Sweden  04040 
 
 
 
