AMANDA E. BEAL
COMMISSIONER
JANET T. MILLS
GOVERNOR
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY 
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
22 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HARLOW BUILDING PHONE: (207) 287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE  FAX: (207) 287-2400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE WEB: WWW.MAINE.GOV/DACF 
  
    TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 1248 and LD 73 
 
An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water 
 
An Act to Require Bottled Water Companies to Monitor for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Celeste Poulin. I am the Director of the Division of 
Quality Assurance and Regulation at the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
(DACF), testifying on the Department’s position as neither for nor against LD 1248 and LD 73. 
 
The Division of Quality Assurance and Regulation (QAR) is tasked with implementing both 
state and federal law regarding food and food products in commerce. In addition to enforcing 
basic food sanitation and safety standards, our Consumer Protection Inspectors enforce retail 
compliance with the Maine Food Code and the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. This 
includes ensuring that all food and food products offered for sale in Maine are uncontaminated 
and properly labeled, including a complete list of all ingredients and any necessary disclosures.  
 
As the public has become more aware of the presence of PFAS chemicals in our environment, 
there has been a legitimate push for increased testing to detect the presence of these 
contaminants in our food supply. QAR supports and encourages this testing and will continue to 
remove from commerce any product intended for human consumption that is determined to be 
adulterated.  
 
The labeling requirement of both bills, however, is concerning. It poses a costly and unnecessary 
burden on a small number of targeted food producers in Maine while not increasing food safety. 
Label and package design are considerable expenses for food producers; nothing should be 
required that is not essential. As the purpose of a food safety and monitoring system in the 
United States is to keep adulterated products out of commerce, it is not necessary to state on a 
package that testing took place to ensure that. I note that there is a myriad of water-based items 
such as iced tea, soda, beer, wine, etc. made in Maine that are not included for consideration in 
these bills nor is there any testing requirement for water products containing water not sourced in 
the state of Maine. 
 
 
  
QAR suggests as an alternative that the current rules be updated to require water bottlers to test 
for the designated PFAS chemicals on a determined schedule (annually, tri-annually, etc.) with 
results submitted to QAR together with their license renewal application. While I defer to my 
colleagues at the Drinking Water Program at the Maine CDC, perhaps this could be aligned with 
municipal water testing requirements. Producers with test results above the established 
thresholds will not have their licenses renewed. This protects public health and maintains the 
spirit and intent of both bills while refraining from imposing unnecessary and burdensome costs 
on producers. 
 
I will be happy to answer any questions and can be available at the work session as needed. 
 
 
 
