 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 472: An Act to Support Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic Projects 
 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 5th, 2023 
 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine strongly supports the passage 
of LD 472 An Act to Support Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic Projects. NAMI Maine speaks to countless 
family members and peers living with Severe and Persistent Mental Illness each year, navigating the mental health 
maze and seeking treatment and support services to maintain stability in the community. These individuals are 
seeking help but find themselves coming up against a litany of barriers, such as timely access to quality community 
mental health services. 
While 1 in 40 Americans will experience a severe and persistent mental illness across their lifetime, less than half 
will receive an adequate and effective intervention prior to their illness progressing to the point of meeting the 
criteria for a disability. On average, individuals wait ten years from the time they begin experiencing mental health 
symptoms to the time they first seek help. While stigma plays a significant role in the delay of treatment, issues 
like access to care, cost of care, and quality of care are other barriers. Without a robust and accessible community-
based mental health system, individuals are left with minimal resources, often resulting in their illnesses 
progressing and requiring a higher, and more costly level of care. Individuals admitted to the hospital due to severe 
and persistent mental illness are far more likely to be readmitted within a month’s time if they do not receive 
appropriate community-based services. The average cost of readmission due to a mood disorder is $7,200. It is 
currently estimated that untreated or undertreated mental health disorders cost the nation $300 billion a year. 
These numbers are staggering to think of the impact on the state and national economy. Certified Community 
Behavioral Health Clinics are an evidence-based practice to support individuals with significant needs in the 
community and reduce hospitalization. One clinic in Missouri reported a 66% decrease in crisis intervention 
services, and 85% of those referred to hospitalization were diverted to more cost-effective community services. A 
CCBHC in Oregon that partnered with a local jail reported a cost savings of $2.5 million dollars in prison costs.  
NAMI Maine supports the passage of LD 472 to support one in four Mainers with a mental health diagnosis in the 
hopes of building a robust and accessible mental health system based on evidence-based practices. As we look to 
save money within the system, it is essential to note that although these programs may cost more initially, they have 
been proven to decrease costs over time. 
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
