Janet T_ “ms énii Maine Department ofHealth and Human Su \ mes 
Gm,emm. _ 5 Office of Behavioral Ht ilth 
ll State House St HZIOH 
41 Anthony A\ enut 
Jeanne L3lI1l)|~0\1' , Ph.D. Augusta, Maine 04* 333_00U 
( 0111 IIIISQIOIIQI ‘ ‘*‘J’$1rl§'i‘;i§a“ “ “A” Tel: (207) 287-2595; Fax: (207) 287-91x2 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Rel n) 
Testimony of Director Sarah Squirrell 
Office of Behavioral Health, Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
Neither For Nor Against to LD 472 
An Act to Support Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic Projects 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on' 
Health and Human Services, I am Sarah Squirrell and I am the Director of the Ofﬁce of 
Behavioral Health at the Department of Health and Human Services. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide additional information for your deliberations on LD 472, An Act to 
Support Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic Projects. The Department is grateful to 
Representatives Madigan, Lemelin, Shagoury and White, as well as yourself, Senator Baldacci, 
and Senator LaFountain, for your support of the Certiﬁed Community Behavioral Health Clinic 
(CCBHC) grantees. We appreciate the commitment to supporting this transition and continuity 
of behavioral healthcare to the people served by these provider sites. 
LD 472 seeks to provide $4 million for one-time funding as a bridge for mental health 
organizations participating in federally funded CCBHC projects that end prior to July 2024. The 
Department is supportive of the CCBHC grant awards provided by the federal Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) to fund behavioral health providers to 
hire staff and implement activities such as peer services, training and supervision, care 
coordination, and expanded call center staff to build the infrastructure needed prior to the 
implementation of Maine’s CCBHC rate structure. 
There are currently two behavioral health organizations who have SAMHSA-funded CCHBC 
projects, currently funded at $2 million per year, that are expected to end in the fall of 2023 and 
have been ineligible to date for continued grant funding to sustain their CCBHC activities. It is 
important to note that the most recent SAMHSA CCBHC grants funded projects at $1 million 
per year, a 50% reduction in previous years awards. Given this change in funding for future 
SAMHSA CCBHC grantees, the Department does not support funding providers to the same 
amount as they received in initial SAMSHA grants (i.e., $2 million per year) to ensure equity 
among currently-funded Maine SAMHSA CCBHC grantees. Funding for these activities at or 
below the current 2022 SAMSHA awards, $1 million per year, for any grantee that does not have 
further funding after the end of their grant cycle could provide a stabilizing bridge to the 
implementation of Maine’s CCBHC rate structure.
Additionally, SAMHSA has been consistent in providing grant opportunities to CCBHC clinics, 
with the potential for another round of grants in March 2023 for which current providers may be 
eligible. If this new funding opportunity is released and the at-risk providers are awarded, state 
funding would not be required to sustain CCBHC activities. 
The Department recognizes that these providers are important partners in informing the 
development of Maine’s CCBHC model. The Department ’s CCBHC development team meets 
monthly with these providers to identify efficacy of evidence-based practices, methods for 
service delivery, and testing of model components that work best for the populations they serve. 
The Department ’s only concern related to this bill is the need for General Funds. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
