 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860
Portland, ME 04112
(207) 774-5444
www.aclumaine.org
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ.  
LD 1478 – Ought To Pass  
An Act to Improve Women’s Health and Economic Security by Funding Family 
Planning Services 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
April 19, 2023  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, greetings. My name is Meagan 
Sway, and I am the Policy Director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the 
Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 
1478 because it would increase the ability of people in Maine, particularly women, to 
access essential health care. 
Reproductive health and access to affordable health care is an essential component of 
economic security, particularly for women. In order to take full advantage of the 
educational and career opportunities afforded to her, a woman must have control of her 
reproductive life. In a study conducted by researchers at the Guttmacher Institute, 63 
percent of women surveyed indicated that contraception allowed them to take better 
care of themselves and their families; 56 percent indicated that it allowed them to 
support themselves financially; 51 percent said it allowed them to complete their 
education; and 50 percent said that contraception allowed them to keep or get a job.1 
 
Women with low incomes are in a particularly vulnerable situation. One in five women 
are not using their preferred method of contraception, and 25 percent say it is because 
they cannot afford it.2 For example, researchers at the Texas Policy Evaluation Project 
 
1 Adam Sonfield, Kinsey Hasstedt, Megan L. Kavanaugh and Ragnar Anderson, The 
Social and Economic Benefits of Women’s Ability To Determine Whether and When to Have 
Children, Guttmacher Institute, March 2013, available at 
https://www.guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/pubs/social-economic-benefits.pdf. 
2 Brittni Frederiksen, Usha Ranji, Alina Salganicoff, Michelle Long, Women’s Sexual and 
Reproductive Health Services: Key Findings from the 2020 KFF Women’s Health 
  
 
performed a study of 800 women in Austin and El Paso, Texas, who had recently given 
birth to a child. They found that though about a third wanted to be using long-acting 
reversible contraception, only about 13 percent were. The most significant predictor of 
whether a woman was able to get long-acting reversible contraception was whether her 
family made at least $75,000 per year.3 
 
Access to family planning services is crucial to economic self-determination and an 
ability to fully participate in a democratic society for those who might become 
pregnant. Yet Maine has seen funding for family planning services stagnant for the past 
decade. With inflation and rising costs, this means that access to reproductive health 
care is less available, with some clinics only able to open one day a week. This 
committee has the opportunity to rectify this by passing increased funding for 
reproductive health care services in our state. 
 
Passing LD 1478  is crucial for anyone who could become pregnant, but especially the 
many women in our state with low incomes. This legislation will extend opportunity to 
the most vulnerable Maine women. It will give them the chance to plan their 
educational and professional lives. It will allow them to better care for the children they 
already have. And it will allow them to better prevent and manage chronic diseases. It 
is because of these reasons that we ask you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1478. Thank 
you for your attention.  
 
 
Survey, Kaiser Family Foundation, April 21, 2021, available at 
https://www.kff.org/womens-health-policy/issue-brief/womens-sexual-and-
reproductive-health-services-key-findings-from-the-2020-kff-womens-health-survey/. 
3 Olga Khazan, Why Some Women Still Can’t Get Birth Control, The Atlantic, Nov. 2, 
2016, available at https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2016/11/contraceptive-
deserts/505577/. 
