Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Nicole Clegg and I serve as the Acting CEO at Planned 
Parenthood of Northern New England and I am pleased to submit testimony in support of LD 
1478. 
Planned Parenthood of Northern New England provides comprehensive reproductive and 
sexual health care to more than 14,000 people in Maine at four health centers located in 
Biddeford, Portland, Sanford and Topsham. People turn to us for affordable, high-quality care 
including wellness exams, birth control, disease testing and treatment, cancer screenings, 
abortion care as well as a variety of primary care services. We see everyone who comes to us 
regardless of ability to pay, and in a typical year, we provide approximately $3-3.5 million in 
free and discounted care to our communities in Maine each year. 
As a mission driven health care provider, we fundamentally believe everyone should be able to 
get affordable, high quality sexual and reproductive health care in their communities, no matter 
where they live or how much money they make and we advocate for policies that help make 
this vision a reality. 
LD 1478's 3.39 million in annual funding for family planning services is crucial step by the 
Legislature to help PPNNE and the other family planning health centers across the state achieve 
this vision, enabling providers to continue to offer sexual and reproductive healthcare services 
including contraceptive care; screening, diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted 
infections; screening, treatment or referral for cervical cancer; breast cancer screening; 
pregnancy testing and intrauterine insemination at a free or steeply discounted cost without 
regard to the at times capricious whims of politicians in Washington. 
The case for public funding of family planning services is clear and unambiguous — with access to 
said services substantially improving the educational, economic and overall well-being of both 
recipients (as well as their families should they choose to have them) and society as whole. 
Reliable access to contraception alone is associated with not just substantial reductions in 
unplanned pregnancies, maternal mortality and childhood poverty— the last of which carries on 
throughout the life of those studied, but also in significant increases in educational attainment 
and economic mobility for people who may become pregnantl . The impact of other elements 
of family planning services are similarly dramatic — STI testing and treatment saves lives and 
1 
US Congress Joint Economic Committee, “The Economic Benefits of Birth Control and 
Access to Family Planning" , Updated February 2020, 
https://www.jec.senategov/public/ cache/files/bb400414-8dee-4e39-abd3-c2460fd30e7d/the-economic- 
benefits-of-birth-control-and-access-to-family;planning_pdf
stops the spread of disease via treatment including vaccination, education and behavioral 
changes; pregnancy testing allows people who may become pregnant to make informed 
decisions earlier and if they choose to carry a pregnancy to term to do so with greater success; 
while cervical and breast cancer screenings often catch those diseases at stages where 
treatment is still option. When viewed holistically, publicly funded family planning services 
represent an almost unparalleled level of return for the public dollar, saving more than $7 in 
future spending for every dollar spent, with federal investment alone resulting in over 10 billion 
dollars in net savings annuallyz . 
Tragically, despite the clear evidence in support of publicly financed family planning, federal 
funding has been frustratingly unreliable over the past decade with access to funds at times 
held hostage to electoral whims and political grandstanding. This politicization culminated in 
2019, when two of Maine's safety net providers for family planning services, PPNNE and Maine 
Family Planning, were effectively forced to choose between accepting Federal Title X dollars 
and providing comprehensive Reproductive Health care for their patients. Simply put, this 
should not be a choice that health care providers are forced to make, health care decisions 
should not be dictated by politicians, they should be made by patients in consultation with the 
providers of their choice. 
LD 1478 is the legislature's chance to change that and ensure that the people of Maine are able 
to access the care that they need, while the state of Maine has allocated funding for family 
planning services for more than a decade, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England has 
not received that funding. An Act to Improve Women's Health and Economic Security by 
Funding Family Planning Services will mark the first time PPNNE receives state dollars to help 
offset the cost of free and discounted care. By passing this bill, the legislature can help ensure 
that all Mainers, no matter where they live, what their income is or whether they have 
insurance, have access to essential sexual and reproductive healthcare — no matter what. 
Funding for these services means Mainers can access affordable, patient—centered, quality 
health care when they need it. lt is for all of these reasons that I urge you to vote Ought to Pass 
on LD 1478. 
2 Jennifer J. Frost, Adam Sonfield, Mia R. Zolna, and Lawrence B. Finer, "Return on Investment: A Fuller 
Assessment of the Benefits and Cost Savings of the US Publicly Funded Family Planning Program” The 
Mi//bank Quarter/y (2014), https;//www.quttmacher.orq/sites/defauIt/files/pdfs/pubs/,iournals/MQ- 
Frost 1468-0OO9.12080.pdf
