Maine Family Planning     I started going to Family Planning when I was in high school. It was a safe, professional space for an inexperienced and uneducated teenager to go for help, advice, and facts at a crucial time in her life. There is not enough emphasis on providing a healthy, unbiased education and a support system to young girls when they need it the most. Most teenagers just don’t know the potential risks and consequences of their actions.  The decisions you make as a teenager will impact the rest of your life. Whether you are deciding to become sexually active and need education to make safe decisions, you have a concern or existing health condition, are in need of routine screenings, or end up with a diagnosis that requires treatment, Maine Family Planning provides a well-rounded primary care practice that focuses on women’s reproductive health.   Women need WOMEN’S healthcare FROM other women. Our reproductive systems essentially control our bodies and our other systems when something is out of whack. It is all connected. At Maine Family Planning, the female doctors and staff understand and can relate to just about everything another woman may be going through. Therefore, it only makes sense that they would be the optimal choice to provide care and advocate for women’s health with compassion and understanding.  So many women deal with chronic pain and undiagnosed illness due to reproductive issues, which creates high levels of stress and anxiety, and do not receive the care that they need from the mainstream healthcare system. Their quality of life suffers. If MFP could reach further to help more women in the state of Maine, that either cannot afford or cannot find healthcare that is suited for them, women overall would have an improved quality of life and I believe their families and the entire state would benefit.  I personally have benefited from many of Maine Family Planning’s services since I was a teenager. They provided me with free birth control, STD testing, consultation, educational materials, and a safe place to ask questions. As an adult, I have had experiences with multiple other clinics and healthcare facilities. I feel the most comfortable and safe at any Maine Family Planning office. They are responsive, easy to get ahold of, with multiple locations, they facilitate easy scheduling and online services, and their female staff are all pleasant, personable, and easy to talk to. I cannot tell you how important those things are. It is a great injustice that many women have suffered in silence for years because that’s “easier” than trying to get care. I continue to use MFP for my primary care and routine screenings. In the last year, I had for the first time ever an abnormal test result involving a cancer scare. I have had to go for further diagnostic testing, and MFP has now referred me for a procedure at the end of May. The routine screenings I receive from MFP caught this issue early enough for preventative action to be taken and I will be forever grateful. If you or someone you’re close to has ever had a cancer scare, I don’t have to tell you that it’s terrifying. Lots of fear, anxiety, and tears. Every question and concern I have had for the doctors at MFP have been listened to attentively, and answered quickly, thoroughly and knowledgeably. Every woman deserves this kind of care, especially when faced with a scary and uncertain future.  
