  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Regina Rooney on behal f of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In support of LD 1478 : “An Act to  Improve Women’s Health and Security By Funding Family 
Planning Services ” 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services  
Wednesday, April 1 9, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services , I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 1478 , “An Act to Improve Women’s Health and Security 
by Funding Family Planning Services .”  
 
MCEDV recognizes the important role that  the full spectrum of  reproductive health care 
plays for survivors of domestic  abuse and violence.  In most cases, having  a child binds two 
people together for the long term, even if their relationship end s; sharing custody and co -
parenting is a long -term project that is overseen and enforced  by the courts . People who 
perpetrate abus e understand  this and frequently use pregnancy as a way of inducing long -
term connection , dependence, and compliance .  They may coerce pregnancy by damaging 
contraceptives or refusing to use them, they may commit sexual assault without using 
protection, or  they may simply wait to show their true abusive colors until after their partner 
has had a child , only then revealing overtly controlling and violent behavior . Given this 
reality , contraceptive care and abortion must be understood as  key tools of safety p lanning 
for survivors  of domestic abuse and violence .   
 
Maine’s family planning clinics understand these connections and are among our close 
partners. They have a proven track record of attending to survivors’ experiences by:  
• creating policies for how to respond to domestic abuse and violence, both as 
providers and employers;  
• keeping current victim services information on hand for patients  in a variety of forms 
and locations, consistent with best practice;  
• regularly screening patients for abuse and violence, and connecting patients with 
Domestic Violence Resource Center  services;  
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, including court ad vocacy services in the civil and criminal courts.  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
• creating a welcome and affirming environment for LGBTQ+ people, helping ensure 
that survivors in this community, who report often being  over looked, are seen and 
supported; and  
• reaching out to D omestic Violence Resource Center advocates for consultation when 
they want guidance for how they can help a patient.  
 
MCEDV supports the funding request for these programs, particularly given the increasingly 
unreliable nature of federal Title X funds that have historically supported their work. Maine 
survivors count on family planning services; we need to ensure that these services rem ain 
strong and available to serve our communities.  Therefore, we respectfully request you vote 
“ought to pass” on LD 1478.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this important bill.  
 
Contact Information:     
Regina Rooney   
Education & Communications  Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)    
Ph: (207) 430 -8334   
Email:  regina@mcedv.org     
 
