TESTIMONY OF  
AMANDA E. BEAL, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
And the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
January 24, 2023  
 
LD 206 - An Act To Make  Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government, and to Chang e Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Go vernment for the 
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 202 3 
 
Good afternoon S enators Rotundo and Ingwersen , Representatives Sachs  and Pluecker,  and 
Members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation and For estry.  My name is Randy Charette,  and I am the Deputy 
Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  (DACF), here on 
behalf of Commissioner Beal to testi fy in support of LD 206, the Governor's Supplemental Budget 
propo sal for State fiscal year 2023 .  This testimony addresses each item and proceeds sequentially 
starting on page A-2 through A -4.   
 
You will see that our supplemental budget requests address urgent and ongoing work, as well as 
critical needs within our prog rams.  Of the 13 initiatives and one language item you will be asked 
to vote on in this budget, seven are related to position reclassifications approved by the Bureau of 
Human Resources, and three initiatives are generally housekeeping in nature.  Hopefull y, these 
introductory comments provide helpful background information as you consider the following 
initiatives.  
 
Initiatives for the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry begin on page A -2 in the 
Bureau of Agriculture (0393).   The first initiative is a one -time appropriation of $650,000 for the 
extraordinary costs associated with animal seizures.  The lasting impacts of the pandemic on the 
pace at which court proceedings are resolved has resulted in animals being in the Department's 
custody for much longer time -frames in the past few years.  Additionally, the Department has 
experienced another recent animal seizure, which is compounding our Animal Welfare Program's 
budgetary gap.  The Department is unable  to absorb the costs associated with continuing to care 
for these animals within existing resources.  
 
Also on page A -2 is the Division of Forest Protection (Z232) .  The first four initiatives in this 
account provide funding for approved position reclassifi cations.  The fifth initiative provides 
$85,657 to cover the increase in aviation insurance for ACF aircraft.  The Division of Risk 
Management within DAFS provides high -quality insurance, loss control , and claims services to all 
state agencies, the state's higher education institutions , and some quasi -state agencies at the lowest 
possible cost. The rates are applicable to various insurance lines provided by the State's self -
insurance program and have been calculated in accordance with Title 5 §1733.   
 
The last initiative on page A -2 provides $115,000 to allow the Division of Forest Protection  to 
replace current firefighting gear and brush coats with new gear that is PFAS -ree.  This would 
replace gear for 75 call -when -needed -firefighters (CWNFF) at $500 per set, and replace 2 sets at 
$500 per set for 67 Forest Rangers, as well as replacing 30 brush coats at $350 each.  
 
At the top of page A -3, there is one initiative for the ap proved reclassification of 13 positions  in 
the Forest Resource Management (Z233)  General Fund account.  
 
The final three initiatives on page A -3 align the allocations in the Harness Racing Commission 
(0320), Milk Commission (0188) , and Off-Road Recreatio nal Vehicles Program (Z 224) with 
revenues as recommended in the December 1, 2022 forecast of the Revenue Forecasting 
Committee.  
 
On page A -4, there are two initiatives funding approved position reclassifications in the Parks – 
General Operations (Z221) program.  
 
Part K , on page 6 , resolves a conflict with Title 7, section 714, subsection 4 and Title 7, section 
3906 -B.  Both sections directed t he Commissioner to deposit the same revenue into two different 
Funds.  This language will ensure that r evenues in excess of $157,000 will be deposited to the 
Companion Animal Sterilization Fund.   
 
 
This concludes the presentation on our 2023  supplemental  budget. We would be glad to respond 
to any questions you may have.  
