Crystal Ward
LEWISTON, MEA-Retired
LD 206
“Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and other members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee, my name is Crystal Ward from Lewiston, I am a  retired teacher 
and the MEA Retired Legislative chairperson representing over 5600 members across the 
State.   I am here to testify neither for nor against the Governor’s proposal for a one-time, 1% 
cost of living adjustment for all current MainePERS retirees. The one-time 1% COLA does 
help, but is a small round bandage placed on a big wound. 
  I am here concerning the ever growing wound to our pensions made by the changes in 
2011. The wound is the COLA capped at 3%, and the COLA calculated on only the first 
$24,186.25 of pension income. Combined these have resulted in decreasing buying power for
everyone in MainePERS.  Every retired MainePers member has watched pension FAIL to 
keep pace with inflation and the result is many moving closer and closer to poverty. There are
too many having a hard time paying the bills, and too many forced to make life altering 
decisions. With the current high inflation rates, raise in rents, food, fuel, about everything, the 
move towards poverty is increasing. When the COLA is only applied to part of the pension 
amount, inflation wins-- add in the COLA at over 8% and only receiving 3% and it a double 
hit!  The wound inflicted in 2011 has turned into an even more gaping hole in 2023. It is past 
time for the Legislature to suture the wound and make the retirees pension whole again and 
give the real COLA increases. Across the State more and more retirees have told me they 
have cut to the bone and cannot make ends meet, drive a 15+ year old car and know they 
cannot afford even a used car, do not do needed home repairs, buy little meat, and buy 
nothing new. This situation was caused by a Legislature and it needs to be fixed by a 
Legislature. The longer the legislature waits to repair the gaping wound the worse the harm to
retirees current and future .The time is now to figure out a way to FIX the gaping wound and 
make the pension whole and keep pace with inflation . 
     
.  

