 
TO: Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan  
 Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
  
FROM:  David Daigler, President , Maine Community College System  
 
RE: Statement in support of the Maine Community College System’s portion  of LD 206 : An 
Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to Change Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023  
 
 Part A - 7 
 
DATE:  January 25, 2023   
 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs , Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , please accept  this memo as our test imony 
to explain how the Maine Community College System uses the funds  commonly called “Racino Funds” 
to provide financial support to our students in need.  
 
LD 206 has an adjustment to our allocation based on rev ised revenue forecasts.  The adjustment adds 
$356,305 to our Racino funds.  This is very welcome news after the decrease in these crucial  funds 
during the pandemic.  
 
Our students are often balancing on a very narrow financial ledge.  One car repair , one medical bill  or an 
increase in childcare  or housing costs can tip them over the edge  and force them to  drop out of college . 
This sometimes happens  with just one or two classes left before earning a  credential that will allow them 
to enter the workforce making  a family living wage  and starting on a lucrative career . These students 
have often sacrificed and poured their heart into their learning and are left with precious little to show 
for it.  The s tudent supports we can provide allow them to continue  their education and become self -
sufficient, proud Maine residents.  
 
In Fiscal Year 2022, MCCS awarded more than  2,150 scholarships totaling  $2.1 million.  Per Maine 
Statute, g rants are need -based and provide financial assistance to students to support student success 
(attraction and retention) or childcare  needs. To benefit from these need -based grants, a  student must be:  
 
• Matriculated, or plan to matriculate, in a program of study.  
• Maine resident.  
• Able to demonstrate financial need.  

 
 
 Below  you will find some examples  of the types of programs offered by our colleges that allow students 
to access these funds : 
 
College Works for ME  is intended to strengthen MCCS student retention and completion by  
fostering greater engagement in campus life, providing access to campus employers who can  
serve as mentors to students, and offering the opportunity for students to gain valuable work  
expe rience tied to programs of study. Additional benefits of the program include:  
•  The ability of a student to build a work schedule around his or her academic schedule,  
• The ability to forge stronger connections between the student and his or her college  
commu nity, and  
• The ability to earn pay to assist with the cost of college.  
 
Momentum at the Start : 
Momentum from the Start provides free summer classes to high school graduates who have 
committed to attending a community college in the fall. This program helps students get 
acclimated to college life and decreases “summer melt,” when some students lose their initiative 
over the summer and do not show up for fall classes.  
 
 
Adult Education :  
This unique partnership with the Adult Education Department of MDOE provides adult 
education students a chance to take one college course while fully supported by their adult ed 
mentor. Maine Department of Education  funds the textbooks for these students. Taking this one 
course before formally matriculating into college helps students build the confidence and 
academic skills needed to be successful in college. Also signals our willingness to support and 
invest in those seeking to return to formal education.   
 
Embark Scholarships  
Embark students have worked regularly with a MCC S pre-college advisor in the final year of 
high school and are more likely to face multiple barriers to attending college. These scholarships 
are often used for costs beyond tuition & fees (textbooks, equipment, room & board, etc.).  
 
Scholarships are contingent on full -time enrollment, continuous enrollment, and regular meetings 
with the advisor. Embark students have historically been more likely graduate on time compared 
to other matr iculated students.  
 
 
 
The Maine Community College System is grateful for the support we receive from the Maine 
Legislature  and the Administration and will be providing more comprehensive information as the 
biennial budget work gets underway.  Thank you fo r your time and attention.  
