 
1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
 
Relating to  the MainePERS Section of LD 206, HP127 , An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and 
Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to 
Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee s on Appropriations and Financial Affairs , 
10 AM Monda y, January 23 , 202 3, Electronically  
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs , I’m Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, 
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. We are a labor union representing over 13,000 
Maine workers, including  workers for all three branches of Maine State Government . 
 
First, on behalf of all the members of MSEA -SEIU Local 1 989, we thank you for the work you are doing 
and will be doing on both the proposed Supplemental Budget  that is the subject of this hearing and on 
the proposed two -year State Budget during this 131st Maine Legislature . It’s so important to fund the 
quality services Maine people count on and to ensure that the workers who  deliver those services, both 
those currently working and those who have retired after dedicating their careers in service to all Maine 
people, are res pected, protected and paid fairly for their work. Your work on this committee is central to 
making that happen.  
 
We’re here today because for  retirees in the State/Teacher/Legislative/Judicial Retirement Plan who 
were eligible for a retiree cost -of-living adjustment (COLA) in September 2022, Governor Mills’ proposed 
Supplemental State Budget calls for a one -time payment equal to a 1 percent COLA for an average 
payment of $175. Several retiree members of our union also are participating in this hearing  to sh are 
their personal stories, and thoughts and recommendations relating to this proposal.  
 
For your reference, the proposed language also linked here  is: PART J  Sec. J -1. Transfer from 
General Fund unappropriated surplus. Notwithstanding any  provision of law to the contrary, on 
or before June 30, 2023, the State Controller shall transfer  $6,600,000 from the unappropri ated 
surplus of the General Fund to the Retirement Allowance  Fund within the Maine Public 
Employees Retirement System for the purpose of providing the  resources to fund an additional 
one-time cost -of-living increase of 1.0% of the established 2022  maximum benefit subject to an 
increase for retirees from the state -sponsored retirement plans. The  additional 1.0% applies to 
retirement benefit payments, up to a maximum of $24,186.25, for the  one-year period ending 
August 31, 2022. This additional increase appli es to retirees who were  eligible for a cost -of-living 
adjustment in September 2022. The additional increase made pursuant  to this section is a one -
time payment and is not included in the calculation of future benefit  adjustments.  
 
While we appreciate this initiative, it’s important to note Maine’s retired state workers and teachers still 
haven’t caught up from the 2011 pension cuts . In addition to the stories they will share with you today, 
several of our members in a recent video we made  told their stories  about being behind the cost of 
living for the past 12 years . Please  watch that video ; it’s linked here . 
 
 
2 
 We respectfully ask that you build upon th e one-time payment in the proposed Supplemental Budget 
and fully fund a retiree COLA that matches inflation for participants in the Maine Public Employees 
Retirement System (MainePERS). By doing so, you can build upon the progress we made in the 130th 
Maine Legislature in strengthening retirement security for participants in the State , Judicial, Legislative 
and Teacher retirement plan . 
 
Together, let’s  keep fighting to undo the damage caused by the 2011 pension cuts . As all of you may 
know, e ver since 2011, when taxes for the wealthy were cut at the expense of MainePERS participants, 
many retired state employees and teachers have struggled to keep up with the cost of living. The 2011 
cuts included:  
• A freeze on retirees’ cost -of-living adjustm ents (COLAs) for 2011, 2012, and 2013;  
  
• A 3% cap on all future cost -of-living adjustments;  
 
• A permanent limit on cost -of-living adjustments so they only apply to the first $20,000 of 
pension income  adjusted for inflation . 
 
Over the years, there’s been widespread recognition that those cuts went too far and there have been 
proposals supported by legislators who are Democrats, Republicans and unenrolled to help provide 
solutions. I n 2022, we made some progress in undoing some of the harm caused by the 201 1 pension 
cuts. The Bipartisan Supplemental State Budget  (LD 1995) passed by both the Maine House and the 
Maine Senate, and signed into law by Governor Mills makes key improvements to MainePERS 
retirement pensions, including increasing the 2021 cumulative COLA by an additional 1%; adding an 
additional 2.4% to the pension base; exempting the first $25,000 in pension income from state income 
tax beginning next year, and increasing the exemption amount by $5,000 a year until it matches the 
exemptions for Socia l Security benefits. Those changes will help retirees now and will compound in 
future years, improving retirement benefits for all participants in the State, Judicial, Legislative and 
Teacher retirement plan.  
 
There is more work to be done and it needs to be done now by fully funding a retiree COLA that matches 
inflation for participants in the Maine Public Employees Retirement System (MainePERS). To help guide 
you in your decision -making, we also are attaching to this testimony a letter dated Aug. 16, 2022, from 
MainePERS Chief Executive Officer Rebecca Wyke to Governor Mills with important information about 
the retiree COLA over the years.   
 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
 



