Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Direc tor | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
Neither for Nor Against  
LD 205: An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to Change Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023  
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee  
January 20, 2023  
 
Senator Ro tundo, Representative Sachs and other esteemed members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee,  
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.   
 
I am here to testify neither for nor against LD 206,  An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and 
Allocations from the Ge neral Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to 
Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023.  Specifically, I am here to testify neither for  nor against Part J 
language in the supplemental budget proposal to provide a one -time, 1% cost of living adjustment, or 
COLA, for retirees in the MainePERS pension system.   
 
While we certainly appreciate the proposal from the Governor, put simply, it is not enough.   This issue 
impacts every single active and retired teacher and ed tech II and III in our public schools in Maine.  
 
For many educators, the MainePERS pension benefits may be all they have to rely on when they retire.  
For many educators, MaineP ERS is their retirement benefit.  Some may not qualify for Social Security.  
Even if they do qualify for Social Security, because the y entered teaching later in their career or worked 
second jobs to make ends meet, most are impacted by the intractable and unjust Social Security offsets – 
the Government Pension Offset (GP O) and the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP).  These two 
offsets generally result in educators losing 2/3rds of the Social Security benefits they have earned when 
they retire.   In some ca ses, retirees may find all of their Social Security benefits are subject to the offset 
and they receive nothing.   It is unfortunate and we continue to look for fixes but these offsets just 
underscore the critical role MainePERS benefits play in allowing te achers and ed techs to retire with 
dignity after a career of educating Maine’s students.  Our public pension system is not built for the type 
of inflation we have seen in this state and in this country over the past few years.  Without additional  
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Direc tor | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
help and resources from the state, retired teachers, ed techs (IIs and IIIs) and retired state employees will 
all see their pension benefits lose purchasing power and the trends are alarming.  
 
In September of 2022, retirees in MainePERS received the maxim um 3% cost of living adjustment on 
pension earnings up to the maximum base amount of $24,186.25.  (It is important to note, any pension 
earnings above this dollar threshold are not subject to a COLA.)  Yet, at the same time, inflation was a 
whopping 9.1%.  Without additional help from the state, the pension benefits for retiree s in MainePER S 
will lose 6.1% in terms of purchasing power in the current year alone.   
 
Last year, the 130th Legislature and this Committee, passed a supplemental budget that recogni zed the 
problem and increased the COLA with an additional 1% cumulative COLA, resulting in a 4% increase 
for MainePERS beneficiaries, although at the time inflation registered at 5.4%.  Even with that valiant  
effort, retirees lost 1.4% in terms of purchasi ng power in their pension benefits.  What’s more, the 
supplemental budget passed in 2022 lifted the base amount the COLA applies to.  This was huge.  By 
lifting the base amount the COLA applies to by the full 5.4% inflationary amount, the supplemental 
budg et from last year at least insured the pension benefits of active teachers (and ed tech IIs and IIIs) 
will not lose purchasing power whenever they retire.   
 
At the MEA we are deeply concerned about the impact of inflation on retirement benefits for retire d 
educators.   And our current situation has only been exacerbated by changes made by previous 
Legislatures and Governors.  
   
In 2011 , the Legislature and the Governor signed a two -year budget that made a number of significant 
cuts to the pension system for  retired teachers.  In addition to lifting the retirement age and freezing 
COLAs for several years, the previous Governor signed a budget that included two very damaging 
elements for those in the MainePERS pension system.   
 
First, that budget reduced the maximum COLA from 4% to 3%.  Retirees are now feeling the impact of 
this change. Over the past two years, with inflation at 5.4% and now 9.1%, the cut of the maximum 
COLA from 4% to 3% has made this problem more severe.  There was a heroic effort by this C ommittee 
and the Legislature last year just to get back to the 4% cumulative COLA.  If inflation continues to come 
in above 4%, the problem will only intensify.   
 
Second, that same budget in 2011 also reduced the amount the COLA applies to.  It was origin ally set so 
the COLA only applied to the first $20,000 of pension earnings, and was later to set to adjust by  
inflation, but again, only by the new maximum of 3%.  This change is huge and devastating and has a 
long tail, especially for career educators.  F or example, if someone spent 30 or 40 years in a classroom 
and retired  with a pension benefit of $30,000 per year, only the first $20,000 was subject to the COLA.  
This provision makes it harder for them to keep up the longer they live.  The issue compound s.  
  
As we have learned since the budget of 2011, Maine’s unique constitutional constraints make these cuts 
even more devastating.  Article IX, Section 18 -A of the Maine State Constitution states:  
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Direc tor | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Section 18 -A.  Funding of retirement benefits under the M aine State Retirement 
System.    Beginning with the fiscal year starting July 1, 1997, the normal cost of all retirement 
and ancillary benefits provided to participants under the Maine Public Employees Retirement 
System must be funded annually on an actuari ally sound basis.   Unfunded liabilities may not be 
created except those resulting from experience losses .  Unfunded liability resulting from 
experience losses must be retired over a period not exceeding 20 years.  (emphasis added)  
 
Lifting the COLA cap by the full inflationary amount or increasing the pension benefits of retirees by 
the full inflationary amount creates “unfunded liabilities” unless paid for up front by the state.  This 
makes even minor changes to the pension system challenging for the state  because any improvements, 
even an improvement just to keep pace with inflation, requires the state to pay the entire cost, not just for 
current retirees, but future retirees as well.  This is why seemingly minor changes to the pension system 
are regularly  slapped with fiscal notes that cost hundreds of millions of dollars per year.  
 
I must point out , there is a significant and mathematical difference between the one -time COLA 
proposed by the Governor and the ongoing cumulative COLAs that are necessary for educators to meet 
their basic needs in retirement.  A one -time payment is just that – one-time.  Retirees will receive a 
check to help meet their needs this year.  But next year, when calculating their retirement benefits, their 
pension benefits will rever t to their current benefit, as if the one -time payment never happened.  A one -
time versus a cumulative COLA has a compounding impact, hence the importance of securing 
cumulative COLAs for retirees.  No one expects deflation in the year ahead, yet a one -time payment 
almost assumes that.  The one -time payment provides some relief to current retirees, but ignores the 
compounding impact of cumulative COLAs and does nothing to address the erosion of pension benefits 
for active teachers and ed techs.  
 
Like other industries and sectors, we are seeing intense workforce shortages in our schools.  Teachers 
and Ed Techs are in high demand with little supply.  All across our state, schools are struggling to 
provide students with certified teachers and qualified ed  techs in order to provide the educational  
opportunities students  need and deserve.  It is not a good look for the professions and it certainly will not 
help our efforts to recruit and retain educators if pension benefits continue to erode.  
 
Lastly, we ar e fully aware that we are unlikely to find the resources in this supplemental budget to make 
retirees whole in this inflationary environment.  MainePERS has conveyed the full cost of moving all 
retirees from the 3% COLA to the 9.1% and lifting the base amo unt the COLA applies to by an  
additional 6.1% will cost a whopping $551 million.  Just a few weeks ago, this Legislature passed LD 3, 
which used excess revenues to prioritize heating and housing assistance for Mainers and created another 
round of checks to  help Mainers cope with increases in food prices, energy prices and housing.  We did 
not object to LD 3 because we fully understand that many Maine people are hurting  and struggling . But 
we hope this Committee and this Legislature will work with us to prio ritize the needs of retired and 
active educators who rely on MainePERS to survive in retirement.  We hope, perhaps as part of the 
biennial budget discussions, we can prioritize those who dedicate their lives to public service to insure  
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Direc tor | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
they can retire with  the dignity they rightfully deserve  and address the challenges I have articulated in 
this testimony .   
 
Thank you for your time and your attention and I am happy to answer any questions you have to the best 
of my ability.   
 
 
  
