  
LD 206 A n Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations 
and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
to Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary 
to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023  
January 26, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs , and members of the  Joint Standing Co mmittee  on 
Appropriations and Financial Services , my name is Laurie Belden and I serve as the executive director 
of the Home Car e & Hospice Alliance of Maine -- a membership organization representing home care, 
home health care and hospice providers across the State. Thank you for the opportunity to provide 
comment on the allocation of supplemental appropriations outlined in LD 206 .  
 
The Alliance is a network of home care , home health care  and hospice providers across our State 
delivering home -based care to older adults and disabled individuals of all ages - allowing them to stay 
in their home and community. Annual ly, our  provider members deliver care to more than 45,000 
clients in their residence s across Maine, traveli ng more than 20 million miles. Collectively, home care, 
home health care and hospice members employ more than 7,000  staff  – making this sector on e of 
Maine ’s largest employers.  
 
Throughout the COVID -19 pandemic, hospitals and nursing facilities received significant attention to 
ensure patients and residents received safe, quality care. While inpatient beds became scarce and 
facilities experienced outbreaks, Maine’s hom e care, home health care and hospice providers proved 
to be  the third pillar in our healthcare system to ensure patients received the care they needed.  The 
most obvious benefit of delivering quality care in the home is that it limited exposure to illness a nd 
infection for our particularly -vulnerable Mainers.   
 
Our industry also filled a critical gap in care by administering vaccinations to Mainers experiencing 
homelessness or living in temporary accommodation s, without regard for cost of this care.  
 
The economic hardships providers continue to fac e even as the pandemic subsides  mirror the acute -
care sector : increased pay for staff (including the reliance of temporary staffing agencies) and 
personal protective equipment (PPE). With patients’ health and wel l-being paramount, our providers  
continue to provide services in times of great uncertainty and increasing costs that don’t always align 
with their  operational budget or reimbursement rates.   
 
However, this is an unstainable model as members are reporting  operational losses of 15 -20% (tens 
of millions of dollars) . In order to shore up the healthcare system and stabilize in-home services , we 
respectfully ask that the home care, home health care and hospice industry be beneficiaries of 
supplemental appropria tions in proportion to the $25 million being  allocated to both the hospital 
and nursing home industries.   
 
(continued)  
  

 
 
Our providers have responded to extraordinary circumstances and demonstrated the extraordinary 
value and importance of home care, home health care and hospice during the public health 
emergency. Hospitals, nursing homes, and home care providers are like a 3-legged stool in the state’s 
healthcare landscape. While the state’s hospitals and nursing homes continue to struggle to care for 
the number of patients that arrive at their facilities, it’s important to recognize that home care and 
hospice providers help to relieve the stress on these two other systems by keeping patients out of 
acute and long -term care settings. If we do not support and bolster our system of in-home services , 
we will not be successful at relieving the pressure on hospitals and nursing homes.  
 
We need your help to acknowledge the important role this industry plays in the continuum of care 
and allocating relief funds will help sustain it as a viable option for Mainers needing care.  
 
Laurie Belden  
Executive Director  
Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Ma ine 
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
www.HomeCareAlliance.org  
