Testimony of Lori A. Fisher, Maine State Library  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
And the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
January 25, 2023  
 
LD 206 - An Act To Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government, and to Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary 
to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 3 0, 2023 
 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, and members of 
the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations & Financial Affairs and Education & Cultural Affairs.  
 My name is Lori Fisher, and I am the Maine State  Librarian. I’m here to testify in support of LD 206, the 
Governor's Supplemental Budget proposal for State fiscal year 2023.  This testimony addresses two 
initiatives on page A – 34 that are specific to the renovations currently underway at the Maine State 
Cultural Building.  
 $1.5 million for High Density Shelving  
Space issues at the Maine State Library have been well documented in architectural studies over the last 
20 years.  Over  the library’s 185 years in service to the people of Maine, it has establish ed several 
permanent collections pertaining to the history and culture of Maine that have steadily grown. As the 
library prepares to move back to space at the Cultural Building, a new shelving layout is planned for the 
public area of the library to ensure compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 
U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.  (1990) in the aisles between shelves. The new layout will also provide additional 
space for conducting research, group meetings and public events.  This funding will purchase high 
density compact shelving for the first -floor  storehouse of the library to relieve current space constraints 
and accommodate materials that no longer will have room in the public stacks of the library.  The basis 
for this requ est is documented in a 2019 study commissioned by the Bureau of General Services 
(Storage Space Requirements Summary -  Final; Space Planning for Cultural Building & BABLO Building ), 
which recommended installation of high density mobile shelving on the first floor of the library with the goal of nearly doubling the storage capacity of that space. We are making this request now so that we 
have enough lead time to procure and install the shelving before the projected construction completion of April 2024.  
 $300K for Space Planning in MSL sectio n of Cultural Building  
This request will provide the Maine State Library with the resources necessary to ensure the investment 
of State funds in the current renovation of the library will make optimal use of public areas and ensure 
the library meets its mission of public service and service to Maine’s public libraries. Creating new models for library service and facility use that align with best practices and adapt to the changing way 
that the library serves the public supports Title 27 § 36 which requires the Maine State Library to 
provide advice to all public libraries in the manner in which library operations are carried out. Funding 
will support a contract with a library space planning firm. This should take place in tandem with the 
purchase of high -dens ity shelving  so that the library is set up for success  at the outset of the opening of 
the newly renovated Cultural Building.  
Lori Fisher
Maine State Library
LD 206
Testimony of Lori A. Fisher, Maine State Library
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs
And the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
January 25, 2023
LD 206 - An Act To Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the 
General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government, and to 
Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, 
and members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations & Financial 
Affairs and Education & Cultural Affairs.
My name is Lori Fisher, and I am the Maine State Librarian. I’m here to testify in 
support of LD 206, the Governor's Supplemental Budget proposal for State fiscal year
2023. This testimony addresses two initiatives on page A – 34 that are specific to the 
renovations currently underway at the Maine State Cultural Building.
$1.5 million for High Density Shelving:
Space issues at the Maine State Library have been well documented in architectural studies 
over the last 20 years. Over the library’s 185 years in service to the people of Maine, it has 
established several permanent collections pertaining to the history and culture of Maine that 
have steadily grown. As the library prepares to move back to space at the Cultural Building, a 
new shelving layout is planned for the public area of the library to ensure compliance with the 
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. (1990) in the aisles 
between shelves. The new layout will also provide additional space for conducting research, 
group meetings and public events. This funding will purchase high density compact shelving 
for the first-floor storehouse of the library to relieve current space constraints and 
accommodate materials that no longer will have room in the public stacks of the library. The 
basis for this request is documented in a 2019 study commissioned by the Bureau of General 
Services (Storage Space Requirements Summary - Final; Space Planning for Cultural 
Building & BABLO Building), which recommended installation of high density mobile shelving 
on the first floor of the library with the goal of nearly doubling the storage capacity of that 
space. We are making this request now so that we have enough lead time to procure and 
install the shelving before the projected construction completion of April 2024.
$300K for Space Planning in MSL section of Cultural Building:
This request will provide the Maine State Library with the resources necessary to ensure the 
investment of State funds in the current renovation of the library will make optimal use of 
public areas and ensure the library meets its mission of public service and service to Maine’s 
public libraries. Creating new models for library service and facility use that align with best 
practices and adapt to the changing way that the library serves the public supports Title 27 § 
36 which requires the Maine State Library to provide advice to all public libraries in the 
manner in which library operations are carried out. Funding will support a contract with a 
library space planning firm. This should take place in tandem with the purchase of 
high-density shelving so that the library is set up for success at the outset of the opening of 
the newly renovated Cultural Building.
