1 
 TESTIMONY  
OF 
MICHAEL J. SAUSCHUCK 
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
Hearing Date:  January 2 5th, 2023, 4:30 P.M.  
“An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to Change Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023 ” 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs , and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs.  My name is Michael Sauschuck 
and I am the Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety.  I am here today to testify in 
support of the supplemen tal budget, L D 206.   
Department Overview  
 The Department of Public Safety was established to serve the people by providing, 
coordinating, and leading a responsive and comprehensive public safety system to protect their lives, rights,  and properties.  This  broad mission is accomplished with 643 positions spread across 
10 bureaus.  The Bureaus are Administration, Capitol Police, Consolidated Emergency Communications, Emergency Medical Services, Fire Marshal's Office, Gambling Control, Highway Safety, Maine Criminal Justice Academy, Maine Drug Enfor cement Agency, and the 
Maine State Police.   My testimony today will focus on the  Maine State Police Turnpike 
Enforcement Unit . 
 The Maine State Police provides full law enforcement services to areas that do not have 
police departments.  Troopers respond to all manners of calls for service much like any other police 
2 
 department  would.  Troopers also patrol the rural roads, interstate system, and Maine Turnpike 
enforcing motor vehicle laws and responding to accidents .  Turnpike Enforcement (Troop G) 
patrols th e Maine Turnpike 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to ensure safety and enforce the laws of 
the State.    
There is one (1) Turnpike Enforcement  Unit-related initiative  which is on page A-38.  Th is 
provides allocation in the Other Special Revenue Funds account to purchase eight  (8) hybrid 
vehicles for the Turnpike Enforcement Unit .  During an earlier curtailment effort this capital was 
not requested in Fiscal Year 22 and 23 when the intent was to not  purchase vehicles in  Fiscal Year 
22 only .  This request is necessary to stay on pace with the Turnpike Enforcement Units  established 
vehicle replacement schedule.  This increases the Other Special Revenue Funds All Other by 
$351,500.      
This concludes m y testimony.  I would be happy to answer any questions that you may 
have.  
 
