1TESTIMONY
OF
PENDER MAKIN, COMMISSIONER
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs
And the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Hearing Date:  January 25, 2023, 1:00 pm
LD 206 “An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to Change Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023"
Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, and Members of the 
Joint Standing Committees, my name is Pender Makin and I am the Commissioner of the 
Department of Education.  I am here today to present testimony for those departmental items in 
the supplemental budget bill.
Some initiatives in this budget will impact more than one program.  For this reason, 
initiatives for the same purpose will appear across several areas of my testimony.  The repeated 
explanations will be summarized and underlined to identify that they were described earlier.  
PART A
GENERAL PURPOSE AID FOR LOCAL SCHOOLS (GPA)
This program provides state funding to support local schools through the Essential 
Programs and Services (EPS) formula and through targeted education funds. The program relies 
on a variety of data systems and property valuation information provided through Maine 
Revenue Services to calculate both the total cost of public education in Maine and the % share 
for which each municipality will be responsible.
The program has two initiatives that may be found on page A-17.
2The first initiative reorganizes an Education Specialist III to a Public Service 
Coordinator II, approved by the Bureau of Human Resources on October 12, 2022, and reduces 
All Other to fund the reorganization.  This position serves as Transportation Director to plan, 
develop and administer the school bus purchasing and school bus refurbishment programs.  The 
position also provides technical assistance and resources to school administrative units in areas 
including school bus safety, buildings and grounds safety, and maintenance.  New 
responsibilities will include contracting and procurement duties. A greater degree of technical 
expertise will also be required to advise and support school administrative units in matters 
related to electric school buses.
The second initiative provides an allocation of $2,220,831 in FY23 based on projected 
revenue from the Oxford Casino as recommended by the Revenue Forecasting Committee in 
their December 2022 report.  This funding is included as part of the state’s share of the total cost 
of education.
LEADERSHIP TEAM
This program encompasses the work of the commissioner’s office, covering all areas of  
organizational leadership - including finance, operations, internal human resources, internal and 
external communications. This team is also responsible for all pertinent matters impacting the 
operation of our statewide education system. The Leadership Team also includes special projects 
and programs; constituent relations; rulemaking processes; development and alignment of policy; 
and coordination with and among the other departments and agencies throughout state 
government.  
This program has one initiative that may be found on page A-17.
3This initiative adjusts funding among several department teams to support costs for 
financial and human resources services provided by the General Government Service Center.  
This initiative consolidates funding for financial and human resources services to the Leadership 
Team program to fund these departmentwide costs in the appropriate program.  Corresponding 
initiatives are included in the Leadership, School Finance and Operations, Special Services, and 
Learning Systems teams.
LEARNING SYSTEMS TEAM
The Learning Systems Team is comprised of four work teams who are responsible for 
implementation of federal programs and grants, including the Elementary and Secondary Schools 
Act (ESEA); the Child and Adult Care Food Program; the National School Lunch Program; 
Supply Chain Assistance; and several funding streams under the American Rescue Plan. The 
work teams within Learning Systems include: Assessment and Accountability, Child Nutrition, 
Elementary & Secondary Education (ESEA), and Emergency Federal Relief Programs (EFRP).  
The Office coordinates and oversees services related to the efficient utilization of federal funds 
to support instructional programs and activities in schools across our state.   The Office also 
collects, summarizes, and analyzes student data for performance, public reports, and policy 
direction while providing technical assistance and professional learning opportunities for school 
leaders and educators. 
The program has one initiative that may be found on pages A-17. 
This initiative, previously mentioned in the Leadership Team program, consolidates 
funding for financial and human resources services to the Leadership Team to fund these 
departmentwide costs in the appropriate program.
4SCHOOL FINANCE AND OPERATIONS
The School Finance and Operations team is responsible for distribution of general 
purpose aid for local schools through the essential programs and services funding model. The 
team also provides: technical assistance to school administrative units to ensure compliance with 
school finance statutes; oversight of data collection systems across the department; development 
and maintenance of a longitudinal student data system; and technology support for department 
personnel.
The program has three initiatives that may be found on page A-18. 
The first initiative establishes an Education Specialist III position and provides funding 
for related All Other costs to support growth in the Child and Adult Care Food Program 
(CACFP).  Public Law 2019, chapter 428 required school administrative units (SAUs) with at 
least one public school in which at least 50% of students qualified for a free or reduced-price 
lunch during the preceding school year to participate in the federal CACFP.  The fiscal note for 
this law indicated that the department would require additional staff if SAU participation in the 
program increased by more than 25%.  SAU participation in the program has increased by 32% 
and is projected to continue rising, requiring the additional position to support program growth.
The second initiative provides an appropriation of $35,000 in FY23 to provide funding 
to school administrative units for the increased cost of maintaining an internet-based application 
for free or reduced-price meals under the National School Lunch Program and the School 
Breakfast Program.  Public Law 2019, chapter 480 provided ongoing funding to establish and 
maintain an online application for free or reduced-price meals under the National School Lunch 
Program and the School Breakfast Program.  Public Law 2021, chapter 635 provided additional 
5funding due to an increase in cost above the appropriation. This initiative provides additional 
funding for the increased cost to maintain the online application.
The third initiative, previously mentioned in the Leadership Team program, consolidates 
funding for financial and human resources services to the Leadership Team to fund these 
departmentwide costs in the appropriate program.
SPECIAL SERVICES TEAM
This program is dedicated to improving results for students with disabilities, offering 
leadership, support and oversight for local education agencies. The Office of Special Services 
ensures the provision of a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment for children with disabilities (ages 3 to 22) as well as early intervention services to 
infants and toddlers (birth through age 2). Our work is accomplished through collaboration with 
families, school districts, public and private agencies, and other programs.
The program has one initiative that may be found on page A-18. 
This initiative, previously mentioned in the Leadership Team program, consolidates 
funding for financial and human resources services to the Leadership Team to fund these 
departmentwide costs in the appropriate program.
