   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
Testimony of  
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner  
Department of Corrections  
 
In Support of  
 
LD 206 An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary 
to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fisc al Year Ending June 30, 2023 .  
 
January 24, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine 
Department of Corrections.   
 
 
DEPARTMENTAL OVERVIEW  
 
The Maine Department of Corrections is responsible for the direction and general administrative supervision, 
guidance and planning of adult and juvenile correctional facilities, community corrections, and related programs 
within the State of Maine. Current ly, there are 1,663 adult residents inside an MDOC facility , 94 adult residents  
living in the community as part of the early release Supervised Community Confinement Program, 5,428 adults 
involved with probation,  18 juveniles  committed and detained, and lastly , there are 63 youth on probation . 
 
A few years ago, the MDOC embarked on a journey to find a better way of doing corrections. We developed the 
Maine Model of Corrections, grounded in the foundational principle of humanizat ion. By treating people well, 
with respect and decency, we see lasting behavioral changes, safer communities, and witness individuals 
reinvesting in healthy lives with lower risk of re -offense. The efforts to put into motion this framework can be 
seen ever y day, by staff, residents, and clients who model for one another open communication, non -adversarial 
interactions, inclusion, and promotion of the safety and well -being of all. Living spaces have been transformed, 
data practices have been overhauled for b etter decision making, stigmatizing language has been replaced with 
person -first language, staff trainings and recruitment are improved for more diverse hiring, and long held 
policies and practices have been revised to recognize common humanity.  
 
This is what corrections should look like in 2023 and with your help, the Maine Model of Corrections will 
continue to uphold the values of this State.  
 
I look forward to talking more about the department, our priorities, and our shared work throughout this session.  
 
Now to the specifics of the Department’s requests in the supplemental.  
 
The Maine Department of Corrections has requested appropriations for  the following:  
 
 
▪ On page A -8 the Department is requesting two supplemental appropriations in the Adult Community 
Corrections program (0124).  
 
The first initiative is a request for $78,000  for increased costs for leasing probation office space and 
costs a ssociated with the relocation a adult probation office . 
 
The primary role of the Adult Community Corrections division is to supervise, and case manage post -
conviction clients who are on probation, or who are still under MDOC’s supervision but residing in t he 
community as part of the Supervised Community Confinement Program.  
 
The department serves more than 5,400 clients through adult probation serv ices. Clients meet with their 
probation officer at regional offices and engage in case planning, which outline s targeted treatment and 
program interventions to reduce criminal behavioral and promote pro -social behaviors.  
 
The requested $78,000 will ensure we are able to keep funded contracts for the valuable work happening 
inside probation offices. Work that most certainly reduces the likelihood of reincarceration in state 
prisons or county jails.   
  
The Bureau of General Services negotiates contracts for the 2 3 offices serving adult and juvenile clients. 
They do their best to keep costs down, but increases can be  inevitable at times.  
 
In addition to general increases, it can be tricky to find suitable locations for probation offices. Many 
communities and many landlords are unwilling to house a probation office or have concerns with 
probation clients in the commun ity. We have the added challenge of finding office space that is large 
enough for our needs. Typically, we need about 6,000 sq. ft, which runs close to $18.00 a sq. foot.  
 
   
▪ Also  on page A -8, the second initiative is a request for $16,000  for increased costs associated with 
cleaning contracts for adult community correction offices. The Division of Purchases goes out to bid for 
cleaning contracts and accepts the lowest bid, however, there have been an increase in cleaning 
protocols since CO VID which have resulted in high er costs.   
 
 
▪ The next initiative addresses increased fuel costs across four programs within the Department. The 
request if for $1.37 million  and will support the Bolduc Correctional Facility (Z155 ), Downeast 
Correctional Fac ility (0542),  Mountain View Correctional Facility (0857),  and the Maine State 
Prison (0144 ). 
The funding request address es the increased fuel costs based on the actual usage at each of these 
facilities, averaged over the prior three years, multiplied by th e per gallon costs of $3.92 dollars. The 
Statewide fuel contact is negotiated by the Division of Purchases.  
 
This ends my testimony on the MDOC’s supplemental funding requests. As you know, we operate the 
Department in an efficient manner looking intern ally for all possible cost -savings to offset additional costs. The 
supplemental funding requests proposed here today are requested out of necessity for the Department and its on -
going operations. We appreciate the support you offer of the work we do.  
 
I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
Randall A. Liberty  
 
