Janet T. Mills
Governor
State of Maine
(207) 287-3531
Douglas A. Farnham
Major General
Commissioner
(207) 430-6000
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management
33 State House Station
Augusta, Maine 04333-0033
Testimony of Scott A. Young, Deputy Commissioner 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS AND 
FINANCIAL AFFAIRS WITH THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS 
AND LEGAL AFFAIRS
LD 206, "An Act to Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations from the 
General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and to 
Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of 
State Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2023" 
January 24, 2023
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, also, Senator 
Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Scott Young, Deputy Commissioner for the 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management. I am here today to 
testify in support of the supplemental budget bill, LD 206.
The Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management (DVEM) 
coordinates and administers the discharge of Maine State Government’s responsibility 
for all military, veterans and emergency management activities through the 
authorization, planning, provision of resources, administration, operation and audit of 
each. In addition to their Federal mission, our National Guard are immediately available 
to respond to the Governor and citizens of Maine in times of crisis.  The Maine Bureau 
of Veterans' Services provides numerous support services to Maine's 108,000 veterans 
and manages Maine's four Veterans' Memorial Cemeteries across the State.  Although 
not included in my testimony today, the Maine Emergency Management Agency is 
charged with all disaster mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and Homeland 
Security operations within the State of Maine.
I will address our budget initiatives in the order listed in the Public Hearing 
Testimony agenda. I will cover DVEM initiatives beginning on page A-13 of the 
proposed General Fund Part-A supplemental budget.
2Military Training and Operations 0108 (Pg. A-13)
The three initiatives on page A-13 provide for the approved reclassification of 1 
position and approved reorganization of 2 positions in the Military Bureau. Initiative 3 on 
this page proposes the reallocation from 27% General Fund and 73% Federal 
Expenditures Fund to 100% Federal Expenditures Fund. If the proposed reallocation is 
passed, all 3 of these positions will be 100% federal funded. The first, second, and third 
initiative will increase the Federal Expenditures Fund by $1,682, $883, and $6,006 
respectively. While the third initiative will reduce the General Fund by $4,898.
These positions support activities under the Master Cooperative Agreement 
between the State of Maine the National Guard Bureau. The reclassification (initiative # 
1) is intended to strengthen the Business Office in the Maine Army National Guard while 
the reorganizations (initiatives # 2&3) will provide much needed support to the Real 
Property accounting and inventory functions within the Military Bureau.
Veterans Services 0110 (Pg. A-14)
The first two Initiatives provide for the approved reorganizations of 2 positions in 
this program. The first initiative reorganizes a Management Analyst II to a Public 
Service Coordinator I position whose duties have evolved because of changing State 
and Federal programs and benefits. The General Fund will increase $2,863. The 
second initiative reorganizes a Grounds & Equipment Maintenance Manager to a 
Deputy Superintendent-Cemetery position due primarily to an increasing complex and 
multi-faceted cemetery operation which increases the administrative requirements of 
this position. The General Fund will increase $2,531.
The third initiative adjusts funding to revenues as recommended in the December 
1, 2022 forecast of the Revenue Forecasting Committee. The Other Special Revenue 
Funds will decrease $6,619.
Finally, the fourth initiative provides funding for the burial of State National Guard 
and Reserve members in the Maine Veterans’ Memorial Cemetery system. In 2022, the 
Legislature passed Public Law 2021, Chapter 593 to enact Maine Revised Statutes, 
Title 37-B, section 504, subsection 4 which allow the interment of State National Guard 
and Reserve members who would not otherwise qualify under the Department of 
Veterans Affairs standards to be buried in the State Veteran Cemeteries. Since passing 
of this law our department has learned the National Cemetery Association and 
Department of Veterans Affairs will not provide a headstone or grave marker for these 
service members, nor will they provide the State with their standard plot allowance. The 
plot allowance is used for the maintenance and perpetual care of the Maine Veterans' 
Cemetery System. Interring National Guard and Reserve service members in our 
cemetery system will utilize a considerable amount of land and resources, both of which 
are limited. Our department can’t absorb these costs. Without this funding, families of 
our interred service members will have to pay for these services. The General Fund will 
increase $22,500.
This concludes my testimony. Thank you and I would be happy to address any 
questions you may have.
