 
Maine Administrators of Career & Technical Education 
1022 Waterville Rd, Waldo, ME 04915 
mainecte@gmail.com  
 
Executive Director Treasurer Executive Committee 
David Keaton David Morse Amy Boles 
  Nicholas Gannon 
President Business Manager Paulette Bonneau 
Julie Kenny Joya Maynard Rob Callahan 
  Ralph Conroy 
President Elect  Robert Deetjen 
Kevin Stilphen  
  
 
TESTIMONY REGARDING 
L.D. 1283 
Resolve, to Reestablish the Task Force to Study the Creation of a 
Comprehensive Career and Technical Education System 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee. I am Dave Keaton, Executive Director of Maine 
Administrators of Career & Technical Education, testifying on behalf of the CTE 
Directors of the Maine Administrators of Career & Technical Education (MACTE).  
 
MACTE would like to address LD 1283 Resolve, to Reestablish the Task Force to Study 
the Creation of a Comprehensive Career and Technical Education System as we are 
neither for nor against this resolve. 
 
The Maine Association of Career Technical Education (MACTE) is an association 
of the 27 Career and Technical Centers and Regions in the State of Maine.  MACTE 
is regularly engaged in a dialogue with state and community-based stakeholders 
regarding the direction of CTE in Maine.  Student participation in CTE and our 
essential economic development mission in the State are critical in shaping the 
State’s workforce of today and tomorrow.   Given the potentially wide-reaching 
implications of this proposal the planning process should thoughtfully and 
broadly consider what would be defined as a viable state-wide outcome.  It is less 
than ideal that today marks MACTE’s entrance into the conversation regarding 
the need and/or desirability of creating a comprehensive CTE high school in 
Maine. MACTE always supports the furtherance of any thoughtful process which 
furthers a collective vision and strategic plan that invests wisely on behalf of 
Maine students, communities, and businesses.   MACTE request that there be two 
seats on this commission. 
  
Specifically, MACTE would offer the following questions: 
  
1.  How will the Commission develop a plan for a regional plan which does not 
disrupt the fragile enrollment regions which currently exist?  
  
1A Given our geographically large but modest population, how would the  
 
investment in a comprehensive CTE high school system improve access, and 
service for most Maine students? A review of the area shows Bath Regional high 
school and CTE Center is 5.6 miles away from the proposed location. 
  
2. If the new magnet school is designated as a CTE Center or Region, would it 
receive funding through the current CTE EPS formula, a process which is 
currently significantly underfunded given the schools it currently serves? 
3. Would the magnet school have the ability to recruit students from both CTE 
Centers and Regions as well as traditional 9-12 high school populations? 
4. Is the proposed school seen as a one-time event or would this process become 
the de facto method for the creation of a state-wide system of comprehensive CTE 
high schools? 
  
5.  Will the Commission be charged with addressing some of the critical funding, 
equipment, course credit and enrollment issues which currently inhibit Maine’s 
CTE Centers and Regions? 
  
6.  Would any special funding, enrollment abilities, construction and renovation 
funding, teacher recruitment and retention planning be available to all centers 
and regions as a result of the Commission’s work? 
  
7. Would the Commission examine the current system/structure of CTE 
education and make recommendations to leverage this network of schools to 
achieve the same desired results as a comprehensive high school  
  
  
MACTE thanks the Education Committee for the opportunity to participate in this 
critical dialog as we shape the environment for Maine’s workforce both today and 
into the future. 
 
 
Yours in education, 
David Keaton 
 
David Keaton, MACTE 
Executive Director 
