State of l\/laine 
State Boa rd of Education 
Testimony of Edmond l\/lorin, Chair of the Career and Technical Education 
Committee of the Maine State Board of Education. 
L.D. 1283: Resolve, to Reestablish the Task Force to Study the Creation ofa 
Comprehensive Career and Technical Education System. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. 
Presented by Senator Daughtry of Cumberland 
Date: April 24, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. 
My name is Edmond Morin. lam the Chair of the Career and Technical Education 
Committee of the Maine State Board of Education. On behalf of the State Board,I 
am testifying neither for nor against L.D. 1283. However, we do have some 
concerns. Among them: whether the study under consideration is too ambitious 
to be completed within the allotted time, whether the task force as set forth in 
this legislation is the appropriate body to undertake such a study, what the hoped 
for end result is of such a study, how this study would be paid for and why it was 
felt important that this be emergency legislation? 
Maine currently has 27 CTE centers and regions across the state ready and willing 
to provide Career and Technical Education to all l\/laine high school students and 
some middle schoolers. All these centers and regions have their own course 
offerings and schedules. Some of the course offerings are due to demand, 
location, for example forestry programs being offered by Region 2 in Houlton, 
budgets, staff availability, facilities, infrastructure and equipment. Sending schools 
also have their own curricula and schedules, factors which have a great deal of 
impact on CTE students, as do the various transportation systems. 
Even given the extra time afforded by emergency legislation, we wonder if sucha 
study can be completed, and a report prepared, by December 6 of this year.
Last week this committee approved a measure that would direct the Maine 
Department of Education to contract with a third party to conduct a study on the 
equity of the Essential Programs and Services funding formula and the way the 
state subsidy funds capital projects. The target date of this legislation is also 
December 6"‘ of this year. I presume that the third-party contractor would utilize 
experts for such an enterprise and have sufﬁcient staff. While L.D. 1283 would 
include several education administrators, we are concerned that none of those 
listed are curriculum or transportation experts, something we feel would be very 
important for this pursuit. While Legislative Council staff support is included in 
the bill under consideration, it would not be available during a regular or special 
legislative session. And despite what are surely highly competent legislative 
council staff members, we wonder if staff more speciﬁcally knowledgeable about 
education issues might be more appropriate. 
Surely a comprehensive study of CTE would require every bit as much effort and 
expertise as one examining the school funding formula. The Board is concerned 
that without adequate stafﬁng, the CTE Task Force would have a difficult time 
completing its mission. 
ln addition, a previous iteration of this task force legislation, L.D. 680 from March 
of 2021, includes a provision seeking outside funding to pay for such a complex 
undertaking. There is no such provision in the bill currently under consideration 
leading one to wonder who will pay for the effort. 
L.D. 1283 includes language calling for examination into increasing crosswalks and 
intersections between technical and occupational knowledge and curricula and 
academic standards to promote multiple pathways for awarding content area 
credit to students enrolled in career and technical education programs. 
And, in its 5-year strategic plan for CTE, the State Board of Education includes the 
goal of promoting CTE program alignment including ensuring congruence between 
CTE coursework and district-wide graduation requirements and standards. 
L.D. 436, An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students with Credit 
Toward High School Graduation for Work Completed in Career and Technical 
Education Centers and Regions, a measure supported by the State Boardof
Education, would go a long way toward accomplishing an important part of what is 
being sought in L.D. 1283. 
Finally, the State Board of Education wonders what is being sought through L.D. 1283 
Does creation of a comprehensive career and technical education system mean 
establishing state standards for CTE? How would such standards mesh with local 
control? And, if establishing such standards means there should be more uniform 
availability of facilities, infrastructure, equipment, and course offerings, how would 
these be paid for? 
The State Board certainly doesn't oppose a comprehensive study looking into a state 
CTE plan. However, we feel that there are a number of questions that should be 
looked into before heading into such an enormous undertaking and wonder whether 
more time and resources should be afforded to ensure that the effort is a success. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. l'd be happy to entertain any questions 
you might have.
