 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1509 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1509, An Act to Amend Certain Provisions of Maine’s Drug Laws  
 
DA: April 18, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1509.    
 
 This bill proposes to reverse amendments to the drug statutes enacted by the 129th 
Legislature.    The effect of those changes was essentially to remove possession of certain thresh old 
amounts of drugs from the definition of furnish and traffick, thereby making possession of those 
amounts sufficient to support only a permissible inference of the furnishing or trafficking crime, as 
opposed to “per se” furnishing or trafficking.  The p ractical result is that the State must introduce 
sufficient additional evidence of the furnishing or trafficking activity (beyond mere possession) in 
order to obtain convictions of those crimes.     The bill would also restore the different treatment for 
cocaine as compared to cocaine base , treating smaller amounts of cocaine base as equally serious as 
larger amounts of cocaine.  
 
 While the amendments made by the 129th Legislature have made it more difficult for 
prosecutors to prove trafficking and furnishi ng heroin and fentanyl, this may be an appropriate 
hurdle, because the additional proof that is required goes directly to the defendant’s conduct as a 
trafficker or furnisher of these drugs, rather than someone engaged in personal use.    
 
 Absent some i ndication that the changes made by the 129th have resulted in public safety 
concerns or inappropriate outcomes, CLAC does not support restoring the language of the former 
statutes.   
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
