 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 1509  
 
An Act to Amend Certain Provisions of Maine's Drug Laws  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
April 18 , 2023  
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety,  greetings . My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union  of Maine, a 
statewide organizat ion committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to 
reject this bill.  
Last session, the Legislature made extraordinary progress in giving words their plain and 
ordinary meanings.1 Before the enactment of last session’s LD 1675, the Maine Criminal Code 
gave the word “Traffick” a definition that bears no resemblance to how that word is used by 
ordinary people. Before last year, possessing 2 grams of heroin meant that you were guilty of 
trafficking heroin. This law made it easy for prosecutors to win trafficking convictions  – even if 
they did not prove that any trafficking actu ally took place . The enactment of LD 1675 ensured 
that the word  “Traffick” in the Maine Criminal Code means:  
A. To make, create, or manufacture;    
B. To grow or cultivate, except for marijuana;    
C. To sell, barter, trade, exchange or otherwise furnish for consideration; or    
D. To possess with the intent to do any act mentioned in paragraph C.  
This makes sense – this is close r to how an ordinary person would define words , although most 
people would consider trafficking far more than what is currently i n statute . The same goes for 
the word “furnish.” Before last session’s LD 1675, Maine law gave that word an absurd 
 
1 See LD 1675, An Act To  Amend Certain Provisions of Maine's Drug Laws, 130th Legislature, Maine State 
Legislature, available at  
www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/display_ps.asp?PID=1456&snum=130&paper=&paperld=l&ld=1675  
 
 
  
 
 
 2 definition: in certain circumstances, to “furnish” and to merely possess were synonyms. If 
enacted, th e bill before you would reverse Maine’s  progress . It would, once again, ensure that the 
words in our statute books bear no resemblance to the words in our communities.  Trafficking and 
furnishing would once again be synonymous with possession in Chapter 45 of the Maine 
Criminal Code.  
This would  amount to a shortcut for the government in taking away people’s liberties. It 
would unfairly weight criminal cases in favor of the government and violate basic tenets of due 
process of law.  These due process violations are not merely academic. They have c reated real 
harm in our state. While the total drug arrests in our state rose only slightly between 2008 and 
2018, Class A drug arrests rose by 157 percent and Class B drug arrests rose by 13 percent 
during that time.2 Drug arrests of women increased 25 percent between 2008 and 2018, with 
Class A drug arrests more than tripling during that time.3 Of the new admissions to Maine’s 
women’s prison in 2020 , 58 percent were for drug crimes.4 The racial disparities are stark : Black 
people make up about 1.6 percent of Maine’s population, but are 21 percent of the Class A drug 
arrests and 15 percent of the Class B drug arrests.5 The shortcuts given to the government have 
not kept our community members safer: deaths from drug o verdoses are higher than they have 
ever been, killing 2 people a day . Fentanyl laces an increasing amount of street drugs, not just 
opioids, so that many people who buy drugs are carrying around mixtures that contain fentanyl 
without even realizing it. And , because many people who have serious substance use disorder 
use significantly more than 2 grams of drugs in a day, this means that an increasing number of 
people are subject to our drug trafficking laws simply for having in their possession drugs to try 
to keep sickness at bay.  
We urge you to vote ought not to pass .  
 
2 Ben Shelor, Jessica Gonzales -Bricker & Carl Reynolds, Justice Reinvestment in Maine Second Presentation 
to the Maine Commission to Improve the Sentencing, Supervision, Incarceration and Management of Prisoners , 
Nov. 12, 2019, (“CSG Report”) available at https://csgjusticecenter.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/10/ JR-in-Maine -
second -presentation1.pdf.  
3 Id. 
4 MDOC Adult Data Report Year End 2020, available at 
https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/files/inlinefiles/2020%20Year%20End%20Adult%2
0Data%20Report.pdf.  
5 CSG Report.  
