  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presi dent 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd 
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scot t F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau   
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523 -9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
RE: LD  1509 --  An Act to  Amend Certain Provisions of Maine ’s Drug Laws  
  
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL oppo ses LD 1509.  
 
This bill would take a backward step when it comes to addressing the drug problem in 
Maine.  Instead of looking to help those who are addict ed to drugs, this bill would 
lower the thresh olds for when possession  of a drug is considered trafficking or 
furnishing, making countless people who are unfortunately addicted to drugs felons 
facing years and pe rhaps even deca des in prison.  
 
Many of the d rug amounts reference d in this bill are drug amounts that are typical of 
those who are drug addicts who are possessing drugs as opposed to people who are 
selling drugs for profit.  This bill also creates dangerous statutory “presum ptions” that 
people who a re poss essing smaller amounts of drugs must  in fact be trafficking in 
those drugs.  Presumptions are troubling  and, when presented to a  jury, can cause a 
jury to convict a defendant for  felony trafficking offenses  when that defendant was 
merely possessing a drug based on their own addiction.  
 
Please vote ought not to pass this bill.  The bill would rever se many years of reform 
when it comes to the drug crisis in Maine.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committ ee   

