Testimony in opposition to LD 1509 
Good morning Senator Pinny Beebe-Center, Representative Suzanne Salisbury, and 
distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. 
My name is Winifred Tate, I am a resident of Waterville, an associate professor at Colby 
College, and director of the Maine Dnig Policy Lab at Colby College. We are researching the 
history and impact of drug policies in local communities, and the experiences of people who use 
drugs and in recovery in Maine. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1509. 
This law reverses recent changes in drug laws about the very small amounts that result in 
trafﬁcking charges and convictions in the state of Maine. This is a step backward, when we need 
to be moving forward to support a public health approach to problematic substance use in Maine. 
Current dmg laws punish people who use drugs with by charging them, and sentencing them, for 
furnishing and trafficking. 
People who use drugs regularly develop a tolerance and require higher amounts to feel the 
effects. Yet Maine’s drug laws allow automatic furnishing and trafﬁcking charges for amounts 
that could be, and often are, for personal use, without having to prove the individual had an 
intent to sell or share the drugs. 
Increased tolerance, a symptom of substance use disorder, means that using the same amount of 
a substance has a diminishing effect over time. The amount of substances consumed in a day 
depends on the person’s physiology, their tolerance and the kind of substance used. Because of 
this, increasing punishment according to weight more heavily penalizes people whose bodies 
metabolize drugs quickly and need more to keep withdrawal symptoms at bay. Allowing drug 
trafficking convictions based only or mainly on the amount of drugs a person has on them 
similarly punishes people with advanced substance use disorder. The science of drug use and our 
interviews with people who have been charged with trafficking show that it is rarely big-time 
drug sellers who are ensnared by drug trafﬁcking laws. These trafﬁcking laws do the same or 
worse harm to vulnerable people by imposing harsher sanctions and more stigmatizing 
convictions based on the amount of drugs a person carries at any one time. 
As part of my work with the Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College, I have interviewed many 
people arrested for drug trafficking crimes in Maine. And many of those people were not in fact 
drug traffickers, but they were people who used drugs, and so had drugs in their possession, and 
because of their amount of personal use, the state made them into trafﬁckers. 
I would like to share on story that represents many similar ones I heard. 
my personal use for like a day? I had a really bad habit. I had a I0 gram a day habit of 
heroin and about a 7 gram a day habit of coke. I ended up getting busted for aggravated
trafﬁcking, but It just that wasn't even true, actually. I did tell them that, but because 
of the amount, it didn't matter. 
They have a hard time believing that people would do that amount of drugs but I mean, 
when you've been doing dope every day for seven straight years and that progressively 
gets worse. it's not like you get better you know, you don't start doing less. You just 
continue to do more. Until I wasn't even feeling anything anymore from it, I was shooting 
grams, and I wasn't even getting high. I was just getting on sick, you know. So it was 
really I was in a really bad spot. 
I looked at my lawyer and I looked at my sleeves up and I was like, look at me, dude. It's 
personal use. I was covered in track marks, it was obvious that I was strung out. I was 
100 and two pounds, you know, I was in bad shape, you know, but they still wanted to 
charge for your trafficking based on the weight. 
We have a clear consensus around the need for a public health approach to address the needs of 
people with substance use disorder. We claim we want to ﬁgure stigma, and to ensure people 
with substance use disorder can connect to the services they need. This law makes that 
impossible for many people whose high personal use long-term means they will be seen and 
treated as predators out for profit, rather than as people suffering from substance use disorder. 
Instead of moving backwards to failed approaches from the past, Maine needs to move forward 
toward with public health approaches to address the devastating consequences of problematic 
substance use. 
Thank you, 
Winifred Tate
