 
 Honorable Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Alexsea Cholewa. I am 
from Aroostook County and reside at the Women’s Reentry Center in Windham. I am writing in 
support of LD 1543 Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Recommend Cost-effective, 
Safe, Administrable and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and Jails. 
Violence is a chain reaction system. If the first link in the chain is not handled you then 
have yourself more reactions. Human nature is known for fight or flight. In a jail setting I would 
argue that fight is used more often than flight. I would like to give my personal experience of 
what I witnessed in the jail system. I committed violence in jail and I am not proud of it. I did 
however try to take steps that would have removed one of us from the situation before things got 
out of hand.  
  In jail there is a revolving door. The staff is overworked. They often see the same people 
from year to year. There has to be a direct correlation with compassion fatigue. They are human 
and have very little time to recharge their batteries.  
 Entering into jail I was an emotional mess. The ladies are housed in one huge room with 
absolutely no privacy from one another. Our bunks were a foot apart. We did have one bathroom 
with a door on it. This was the only privacy we had. The emotional combination of withdrawing 
from drugs and a being housed in one room with ten other women had me on edge. As the days 
went by, I tried to deescalate a fight that was going to happen. I had my sister call the jail and let 
them know I was feeling uneasy with another lady I was housed with. The jail had talked to my 
sister briefly. My sister might not be a creditable source in the jails eyes. This should not hinder 
taking safety precautions though. Another day went by and there was no movement to separate 
us. The negative atmosphere continued. I voiced my opinion to the guards and other ladies did as 
well. There was a clear indication that there was one lady who was the common denominator. 
Instead of being safe and relocating one of us I got into a physical fight.  
I want to make it known that I did provoke the situation in some ways. I did try to voice 
that violence was going to happened. I simply did not want to fight. I knew that if a fight did 
happen the jail would then separate us. The outcome resorted to the other lady continuing to get 
verbally abused by others. This is the chain reaction.  
 
 I am a good person and I don’t want make anyone’s situation any harder than it already 
is. We both went to segregation, which was the jails best option in some ironic way.  
There has to be a better option than waiting for the violence to occur. That is why this bill 
LD 1543 Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Recommend Cost-effective, Safe, 
Administrable and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and Jails is so 
important. Both of us were hurt and the problem was not solved. LD 1543 would look at where 
and when violence occurs. It would look at programs to decrease violence in jails and prisons 
and it would suggest solutions. Those solutions will teach us how to problem solve. The ultimate 
outcome will be safer jails and prisons and safer communities. 
Thank-you for your support. 
Lexsea Cholewa 
Women’s Reentry Center in Windham 
