 Senator Beebe Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,  
 
My name is Arimela Shima, I  currently reside i n Italy, and I have a loved one, Richard, 
incarcerated under Maine’s jurisdiction. I’m testifying in support  
of LD 1543 Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Recommend Cost -effective, Safe, 
Administrable and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and Jails.  
Richard has been both a victim of violence and has part icipated  
in violence. The main factors behind his participation in violence are   his prolonged time spent 
in solitary confinement (most of the 19 years out of the   21 years he has been incarcerated) 
and his lack of proper mental health treatment.  I can onl y speak for his situation and for what 
he went through.  Being segregated for so long has resulted in Richard feeling anxious and 
vulnerable.  Prison is for many people the first time they face their trauma and struggles from 
childhood. Richard was born and raised in violence and I think in order to reduce violence in 
prison it’s very important to address the root cause rather than just look at the end result.   
Meaningful mental health treatment isn’t just giving residents meds through a cell door slot.   
I believe successful treatment includes  therapy to help them learn coping skills and 
mechanisms to positively interact with others.   
The most violent residents need the most help because they’re the ones suffering the most. 
Richard needed the most help. Labeli ng violent residents without supporting them in 
becoming better men and women adds to the cycle of violence.  
Richard’s son and I, as his loved ones, know that violence has a profound impact on us 
because we constantly worry about his safety.  As methods to curb violence, we believe that 
widespread effective mental health treatment, one on one and in groups, and the curbing of 
periods of isolation in a cell would be the most helpful. But, a thorough investigation of 
programs in other correctional facilities t argeted at reducing violence is essential in helping us 
understand what methods are most successful.  These methods would benefit not only the 
residents but also the community. If prison is a place meant to rehabilitate, punishment 
shouldn’t be the only met hod used.   
 
I urge you to unanimously support LD 1543 Resolve, to Establish the Commission to 
Recommend Cost -effective, Safe, Administrable and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence 
in Prisons and Jails. Thank you for your time.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Arimela Shi ma 
 
