Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1543 
Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Recommend Cost-Effective, Safe, 
Administrable, and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and lails 
Presented by Representative Moonen 
Before the Criminal Iustice and Public Safety Committee, April 25, 2023 
Senator Bee-bee Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the 
Criminal justice and Public Affairs Committee, my name is Lani Graham. 
I am a former Chief Public health Officer for Maine. I serve on the Public 
Health Committee of the Maine Medical Association. I live in Freeport. 
Everyone in this room must recognize the terrible challenge posed by 
confining people in limited spaces, all of whom have been convicted of 
some crime and many of whom also have illnesses such as substance 
use disorders or mental health diagnoses. Such an environment is 
tailor made for an outbreak of violence. I say “outbreak ” deliberately 
because violence is like a virulent infectious disease. It spreads easily 
and rapidly from one person to another in confined areas with certain 
vulnerable people, such as those with mental health illnesses, trans 
people or others thought to be different, more likely to be affected and 
even die.. 
In October of 2021, one of the few truly bipartisan pieces of legislation 
of that year was passed. It was the Prison Camera Reform Act,a 
congressional bid to address violence in federal prisons. Assuring the 
“health and safety" of staff and residents was identified as the top 
rationale for the legislation.1 It's a good rationale to consider here in 
Maine as we contemplate the impacts of all forms of violence on those 
staff and residents involved. 
Around the country people are becoming increasingly concerned about 
the danger violence poses to the incarcerated, their caretakers and the 
1 
https://www.grassley.senate. gov/news/news-releases/us-senate-passes-bipartisan-bill-to- 
reduce-violence-civil-rights-abuses-in-american-prisons
communities to which they will return. This is a concern that Maine 
should share. In recent years data collection indicates that deaths are 
going up for those held in Maine prisons and jails. These deaths include 
an increase in suicides. There are reports of other forms of violence, 
which certainly should not be surprising given the challenges posed by 
the very fact of incarceration. 
If we hope to ever have healthy people returning to our communities 
from prisons or jails, this issue must have top priority. Maine people 
are creative and inventive. Now would be a good time for Maine people 
to work together and come up with plans for violence elimination 
behind bars. This study Commission offers that opportunity. 
As Iames Baldwin wrote in 1962: “Not everything that is faced can be 
changed, but nothing can be changed that is not faced" . Violence in 
prisons and jails must be faced and if any state can do it, we can create 
that needed change. 
I hope you will give this bill your unanimous support. 
Thank you for your attention, I would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.
