Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 1543
To Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee of the Maine 
Legislature:
I am writing in opposition to LD 1543  “Resolve, to Establish the Commission to 
Recommend Cost-effective, Safe, Administrable and Healthful Programs to Reduce 
Violence in Prisons and Jails.” My opposition is based on the composition of the 
proposed commission. 
A commission studying a specific problem and making recommendations on solutions
to that problem should be made up of a diversity of people but primarily those who 
have been or are most impacted by the problem. Therefore, the (vast) majority of 
those on that commission should be made up of those with the most direct experience 
with and knowledge of the problem and what to do about it. In this case, those 
individuals should have been incarcerated, especially those who have experienced 
violence or seen how violence could be avoided, and, to a lesser extent, those who are
around those (potentially) violent situations on a regular basis—guards. 
This is not the recommended makeup of the commission. Of the 15 individuals 
making up the committee, only #5 (advocating for interests of people who are 
incarcerated), #10 (solitary confinement—whatever that means!!), and maybe #11 
(“racial minorities”) and/or #7 (behavioral health/SUD) are definitely, likely, or 
possibly individuals who have experienced jail or prison, in any significant and long 
term way. It is also possible that #6 could be a current or former guard. So, only about
3, maybe 4, out of 15 on the commission really understand and have personally 
experienced this problem. If you don’t understand a problem personally, how can you 
identify an effective solution? It’s much more difficult, maybe impossible.
Of course, a commission can talk with others who have that personal, lived, 
experience. But, those individuals have no final say in what the commission 
recommends. They do not have the power to make a decision where they are the most 
knowledgeable. This happens constantly in the legislature, in workplaces, and in 
many other situations. Those who know the most and are most impacted have little or 
no say or power over what happens to them. They are cogs in the wheel but not 
decision-makers who have some control over their own lives. 
Having someone from the DOC, the Maine Medical Association, organized labor, 
public health, sheriffs, psychiatric physicians, and the legislature itself on the 
commission makes sense because you want buy-in from these groups for the 
recommendations of the commission. However, representatives from those groups can
be on an “advisory panel” that is consulted by the commission but is not part of final 
decision-making on recommendations. 
I know it is a stretch for those who have power to give up some of that power to 
those, like individuals who have been incarcerated and those who guard them, who 
appear to have little or none and are not always well-respected by those who consider 
themselves more “respectable.” But, I urge you to redesign the makeup of the 
committee to include at least 6-8 individuals who have been incarcerated and at least 
two current or former guards.  
Sincerely,
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706 or larryd@myfairpoint.net
