               
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  
 
April 25, 2023    
 
Senator Pinny H. Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety  
State House, Room 436  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: LD 1543, Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Recommend Cost -effective, Safe, Administrable and 
Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and Jails  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and Honorable Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety:  
 
My name is Mary Bonauto and I am the Senior Director of Civil Rights at GLBTQ Legal Advocates 
& Defenders  (GLAD) , a litigation and policy organization addressing issues affecting the LGBTQ people 
across communities.  We thank Representative Moonen and Repr esentative Salisbury for bringing forth 
LD 1543, and GLAD, together with EqualityMaine , MaineTransNet  & Portland Ou tright , strongly  support 
this bill.  
Violence between residents or resident -to-staff, and self -harm of residents and of staff, are the among 
the most urgent a nd vexing issues facing prison and jail administrators, staff, and residents.  This Resolve would 
look backward to understand the conditions giving rise to the violence far beyond the immediate matter at hand.  
A contextual examination of the housing, heal th, health treatment and program status surrounding the violence in 
each case is the type of systemic view that can lead to greater insight and concrete action steps.  
Looking forward, the Resolve would look to costs and savings from different models for v iolence 
reduction programs with the expectation that learnings could be evaluated by the DOC and Sheriffs to effectuate 
safer, and more administrable and more cost -effective environments for all.  Staff care is a central part of this 
effort, including a fo cus on how violence affects them in health care costs, staff retention and recruitment.   This 
Committee has certainly heard of staff who simply could not continue working in prisons and jails because of what 
they experienced.  Last but certainly not least , violence -reduction models in prisons and jails would affect resident 
health, re -entry success, and recidivism, and thus public safety.  
At present, part of how the Department of Corrections and the jails try to keep staff and residents safe 
from violence  through restrictive housing. The DOC distinguishes among “administrative status,” which includes 
2 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  “restrictive housing,” and “disciplinary segregation status,”1 “protective custody status,”2 and operating special 
management housing such as the “administrative control unit,”3 but violence and security threats are the 
common denominator.  Jails also have places and ways of using restrictive housing to manage persons acting out 
or acting violently. Violence may lead to disciplinary consequences an d punishment, and isolation is justified in 
terms of staff and resident safety.  
ME DOC policies reflect these concerns.  For example, Maine DOC Adult Policy 15.1, governs 
administrative status and centers violence in its first paragraph.4 
[Adult Policy 1 5.1] III. … Residents are placed on administrative status when their continued 
presence in general population would pose a direct threat to staff or other residents or a clear 
threat to the safe and secure operation of the facility.   
This review is warrant ed by the lives of staff and residents affected.  According to the Correction Leaders 
Association and Liman Center at Yale Law School, for the one year period of July 1, 2020 to July 1, 2021, there were 
134 violent, prisoner -to-prisoner incidents in the ge neral population and another 65 of prisoner -to-staff violence in 
 
1  Policy 15.2 available at: https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/files/inline -
files/49876476_0.pdf  According to Policy 15.2,  
1.   A resident may be placed on disciplinary segregation status only after having been found guilty of a major 
violation (Class A or B) of a resident disciplinary rule ( i.e., a violation that poses a direct threat to the safety of 
persons or a clear threat to the safe and secure operation of the facility)  and only after having been given a 
disposition of disciplinary segregation after consideration of the other dispositions that are available to safely deal 
with the threat  posed by the resident’s conduct in accordance with Department Policy (AF) 20.1, Resident 
Discipline.  [ ]  
2  Policy 15.3 is available at: https ://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/files/inline -
files/39405172_2_0.pdf   
3  Policy 15.5 is available at: https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/files/inline -
files/15.05%20ADMINISTRATIVE%20CONTROL%20UNIT%20_0.pdf    It provides:  
“The Department of Correcti ons recognizes that some prisoners in its adult facilities who are in a restrictive 
housing unit may need to be housed separately in special management housing for a period of intensive security 
and programming when a return to general population may pose a repeated or serious threat to the safety of 
others, risk of escape, or another repeated or serious threat to facility security.  The purpose of this policy is to 
provide governance for the supervision of prisoners in the Administrative Control Unit (ACU). ” 
4  Available at: https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/files/inline -
files/Policy%2015.1%20%28AF%29.pdf   (updated Jan. 2023) . 
Note that those on “administrative status” have different access to health services, good time deductions, and living 
conditions than in other statuses:  “ This policy does not govern residents on disciplinary restriction, on disciplinary 
segregation status or protective custody status, or in the Administrative Control Unit or the Intensive Mental 
Health Unit (IMHU). )” 15.1 (III).   
See also  VII. PROCEDURES Procedure A: Administrative Status Placement when one or more criter ia met:  
“a. the resident is a clear  threat to the safe and secure operation of the facility in that the resident constitutes an 
escape risk if in a less restrictive status  (e.g., the resident has attempted an escape, possesses escape tools, etc.); 
b. the resident is otherwise a clear threat  to the safe and secure operation of the facility  if in a less restrictive 
status (e.g., the resident is refusing to cooperate with an intake procedure, refusing to cooperate with a search, 
refusing to leave a restrictive housing or special management hous ing placement, participating in drug trafficking 
in general population, actively promoting Security Threat Group (STG) or gang activities, etc.);  
c. the resident is a direct threat to the safety of another person if in a less restrictive status (e.g., the  resident has 
assaulted or threatened to assault another person, is stalking another person, possesses weapons, etc.); or  
d. the resident is under direct threat to their safety if in a less restrictive status (e.g., the resident is a high -profile 
case, th e resident is a former criminal justice official, the resident is the target of an STG or gang, etc.).”  
3 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  Maine prisons.5  As to self -harm, there were 59 attempted or completed suicides in the general population and 9 
in restricted housing during this time period.6   Other self -injuring behavio r was reported for 157 individuals in the 
general population and 34 in restrictive housing.7  This is only a small part of their available data and modes of 
evaluating prison safety.  
This Resolve seeks to examine how to reduce violence in prisons and jai ls. The Department of Corrections 
and the Sheriffs are capable of considering new and effective ways of addressing the safety imperative in their 
facilities that are also administrable, healthful and cost -effective, that keep everyone safer, and make it mo re likely 
for residents to succeed on the outside.   
Thank you for your consideration of this important bill.  We urge the Committee to vote ought to 
pass on LD 1543.   
 
Truly yours,  
Attorney Mary L. Bonauto  
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
Equality Main e 
MaineTransNet  
Portland Outright  
 
GLAD  
257 Deering Ave., #203  
Portland, ME 04103  
 
 
 
                           
 
 
5  Correctional Leaders Association, Liman Center at Yale Law School, Time -In-Cell: A 2021 Snapshot of 
Restrictive Housing based on a Nationwide Survey of U.S. Prison Systems (Aug. 24, 2022), at vii, available at 
law.yale.edu/liman/solitary , at 82, Table 30.   
6  Id., at 86, Table 34.  
7  Id.  
