Testimony	of	Paul	Schlosser,	Disabled	Veteran	Residence:			Homeless.	Portland																										Supporting	LD	1543:		Resolve,	to	Establish	the	Commission	to	Recommend	Cost-Effective,	Safe,	Administrable,	and	Healthful	Programs	to	Reduce	Violence	in	Prisons	and	Jails	Presented	by	Representative	Moonen	I	am	writing	to	describe	to	you	my	personal	experience	of	violence	with	the	prison	system.			I	don’t	believe	any	one	person	can	be	blamed	for	this	situation.					It	is	simply	the	natural	result	of	a	lot	of	people	being	crowded	together,	all	of	whom	are	troubled	and	many	of	whom	are	sick	with	one	or	another	illness.			I	entered	the	Army	in	2003	at	the	age	of	18.		Unfortunately,	I	was	honorably	discharged	one	year	later	with	several	diagnoses	that	have	caused	me	to	be	disabled—PTSD,	bipolar	disorder	and	tinnitus.	I	worked	part-time	until	2005	when	I	jumped	off	a	roof	and	broke	both	my	heels.			This	injury	led	to	me	becoming	dependent	on	opioids	and	that	in	term	led	me	to	committing	robberies	to	support	my	habit.			I	was	ultimately	arrested	in	2010	and	committed	to	Maine	State	Prison	for	seven	years.			During	that	time,	I	had	multiple	incidents	of	cutting	behavior	and	was	deeply	depressed	most	of	the	time.			It	was	difMicult	to	get	care	for	my	illnesses.					During	that	term	of	imprisonment,	I	was	conMined	in	a	chair	with	four	limbs	restrained,	hooded	and	pepper	sprayed	because	I	had	torn	off	a	bandage	that	had	been	applied	following	an	episode	of	cutting.			There	is	a	video	of	this	episode	that	was	made	public	by	the	Portland	Press	Herald	in	2012.				Although	this	episode	is	on	you	tube,	I	cannot	watch	it	as	it	brings	back	memories	of	that	experience.	After	being	released	on	probation	in	2016,	I	was	returned	to	the	Maine	state	prison	following	a	probation	violation	that	was	calling	my	wife	to	Mind	out	how	my	daughter	was	doing.			My	wife	was	in	Florida	at	the	time	with	our	daughter.			I	was	given	three	more	years	for	that	probation	  
violation	and	returned	to	prison	in	2020	and	released	this	month	on	probation.	Violence	is	common,	even	now,	in	the	Maine	state	prison.			I	have	seen	many	Mights.			Because	I	am	disabled	and	weak,	I	try	my	best	to	stay	away	from	these	Mights.			It	seems	like	violence	spreads	easily.			The	guards	have	a	hard	time	controlling	it.			I	don’t	see	much	empathy	or	respect	demonstrated	between	the	residents	or	between	residents	and	guards.			It	seems	to	me	if	there	was	a	way	for	professionals	from	all	sides	of	the	violence	issue	so	common	in	Maine	prisons	and	jails,	to	get	together	and	consider	options	for	dealing	with	this	on-going	problem,	it	might	make	a	big	difference.	Thank	you	for	considering	this.	
