 
 
 
 
 
LD 1543, Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Recommend Cost-effective, Safe, Administrable 
and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and Jails  
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee neither for nor against LD 1543. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1543 do?  LD 1543 establishes the Commission to Recommend Cost-effective, Safe, 
Administrable and Healthful Programs to Reduce Violence in Prisons and Jails. The Commission is directed to 
examine the issue of violence in prisons and jails in the State, including the development of measures to reduce 
that violence, and to submit a report to the Legislature by December 6, 2023. Additionally, the Commission 
would be comprised of 15 members representing stakeholders from a diverse array of backgrounds, including 
representatives from the Department of Corrections, Maine Medical Association, a racial justice organization, 
and several other organizations.  
 
If the Commission is established, it should include a representative of county commissioners.  The study 
commission proposed by this bill would evaluate a number of important and complex issues related to violence 
in jails, and with or without this Commission, county government takes these issues seriously and will continue 
to work on reducing violence in county jails. The safety of our employees and our incarcerants is extremely 
important. That said, our Association does not take a position as to whether the Legislature should establish this 
particular Commission to study these issues. However, if the Legislature decides to move forward with this bill 
and establishes such a study Commission, we would respectfully suggest that a county commissioner 
representative be included as a member on the Commission.   
 
County governments run county jails and expend significant financial resources on the operation of such 
facilities. In this regard, having a county commissioner representative on the Commission would bring important 
fiscal and governance experience to the Commission’s discussions. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1543 
April 25, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
