TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 481 
"An Act to Allow the Deferral of a Moose Hunting Permit if More than One Permit ls Awarded 
Within the Same Household" 
Presented by Representative DILL of Old Town. 
Cosponsored by Representatives: LANDRY of Farmington, MASON of Lisbon, THORNE of Carmel, 
WOOD of Greene, Senator: BLACK of Franklin. 
DATE OF HEARING: March Z7, Z023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. l am Jim Connolly, Resource Management Director for the 
department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for 
nor against LD. 481.' 
This bill would allow a person who holds a valid moose permit to defer the permit until the next 
moose hunting season when someone else in that permit holder's household also holds a valid 
moose permit for the same hunting season. 
The Maine Moose Hunt is a unique moose hunt within the United States. It is a highly valued 
and a sought-after hunting opportunity by residents and nonresidents alike. Over the years it 
has become a family tradition for some families and for others, a once in a lifetime opportunity. 
In each case it is clear the people who are drawn are fortunate individuals who value that 
opportunity. 
The moose hunt and the drawing that allocates the permits is designed to fairly allocate a 
limited opportunity to hunt. The drawing has been fine-tuned by the Legislature over the years 
and is currently a complex series of considerations with preference points, the ability to swap 
permits, lodge permits, waiting periods and considerations for zones and seasons. One thing is 
clear through all of this, that when you win a permit in the drawing that permit being given to 
you means that many who applied did not get that permit. For those individuals not drawn that 
year, it may have been their only opportunity to hunt. As such, each permit drawn and 
allocated affects all other names drawn or not drawn afterwards by taking that type of permit, 
zone, and time out of the pool of permits that might have been drawn later for people to 
receive. 
Let's talk about the applicant pool currently. Very few people apply by themselves without any 
other family members or friends applying simultaneously. As such, an overwhelming numberof
applicants go into the drawing knowing that several family members even household members 
are in the drawing at the same time. At this point we have a very responsive policy in deferring 
permits to address life situations like illness, death, and deployments. We have been able to 
accommodate these deferments and incorporate them into the next year's hunt. 
This bill would greatly complicate the drawing and make it that much more difficult to 
administer and track. Our first question is what constitutes a household? is it a single address, a 
family, and if there are remarriages does it then incorporate several family units covering 
children and stepchildren? For a grandparent who is the hunting buddy or person in a child’s 
life should we consider them part of the household even though they live in a different 
dweliing? We feel this is a very challenging area to try to navigate and regulate. 
Would you allow a household who defers to put in again the following year and then potentially 
pick between the permits? The point is this situation gets complicated very quickly and there 
isn't any end to the mitigating factors that may be raised by people in this process. If the 
Legislature wants to address the issue of multiple permits in a household, we recommend that 
the law be that either the individuals accept the permits and hunt or relinquish any of the 
permits and that individual not lose their points. This would allow them to go back into the 
drawing the following year when they are prepared to hunt. We do not feel allowing people to 
pick and choose between permits they receive and defer permits is fair to other moose permit 
applicants and it is not workable for the Department. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
