 
 
 
PO Box 5257 | Augusta, ME | 04332  
 
 
 
May 12, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey,  Chair  
The Honorable Anne Perry , Chair  
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
RE: Testimony neither for no r against  LD 1 816, An Act R equiring Reference -based Pricing to Re duce Prescription 
Drug Costs and LD 1829, An Act to Reduce Prescription Drug Costs by Requiring Reference -based Pricing  Act to 
Reduce Prescription Drug Costs by Using Internation al Pricing  
 
Dear Senator  Bailey , Representative Perry , and members of the Heal th Coverage and Financial Services 
Committee :  
 
My name is Amelia Arnold , and I a m a resident  of Winthrop, Maine, a lic ensed pharmacist  employed b y 
Comm unity Pharmacies and  Legislative  Liaison of the Maine Pharmacy Association.   The MPA  is the state 
pharma cy organization that addresses  the advocacy, continuing education , and professional needs of all licensed 
pharmacists, pharmacy technicians , and student phar macists in Maine.  Our mission is to promote public health by 
advocating for the profession of phar macy.   On behalf of  the Maine Pharmacy Assoc iation, I am testifying  today 
neither for nor against LD 1 816 and LD 1829.  
 
Pharmacists in Main e see every  day the s truggle  that some Maine residents have to afford their medication.  We 
agree  that prescr iption d rug price r elief is an impo rtant topic and support the concept of  making  drug prices more 
afford able.  However, we have conce rns regarding obstacles that would exist  with a “referenced rate” and fea r with 
our current drug distribution system it would lead  to issues with accessibility  for Mainers .  As written, health plans 
and retail pharmacies  would be prohibited from purchasing drugs a bout the r eferenced rate to distribu te or 
dispense to certain consumers - but lacking a meaningful  infrastructure that would  allow  pharmacies to access 
these prod ucts below  the refere nced rate may lead to a lack of access  of med ications for some  patient s. 
 
Pharmacy staff  work every day  to obta in medications at the lowest price available for our patients, but the fact is 
that  we are limited  and do not hav e the a bility to di ctate t he purchase price of products from either the 
manufact urers or wholesalers .  Until there is a dependable supply c hain set up those pharmacies  may p urchase 
these drugs below the reference  rate , and w e wou ld ask that there  be no prohibition in place so that we may 
continue to prov ide uninterrupted services.   
 
The M aine Pharmacy Association  is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this 
legislation . Thank you for yo ur time and consider ation.  
 
 
Most Sincerel y,  
 
Amelia Arnold, PharmD  
Vice Pres ident of Oper ations  | Community Pharmacies, LLC  
Legislative Lia ison  | Maine Pharmacy Association  
