 
 
Maine State Legislature – Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
Testimony of Laura Hoch, 
Senior Manager, Advocacy, National Multiple Sclerosis Society 
LD 1816 – Ac Act Requiring Reference-based Pricing to Reduce Prescription Drug Costs 
LD 1829 – An Act to Reduce Prescription Drug Costs by Requiring Reference-based Pricing 
 
 
Chair Bailey, Chair Perry and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on our support of LD 1816, Ac Act 
Requiring Reference-based Pricing to Reduce Prescription Drug Costs, and LD 1829, An Act to Reduce 
Prescription Drug Costs by Requiring Reference-based Pricing, and how it may affect those who live with 
multiple sclerosis (MS).  
 
MS is an unpredictable disease of the central nervous system. Currently there is no cure. Symptoms vary 
from person to person and may include disabling fatigue, mobility challenges, cognitive changes and 
vision issues. An estimated 1 million people live with MS in the United States. Early diagnosis and 
treatment are critical to minimize disability. Significant progress is being made to achieve a world free of 
MS. 
 
 When someone is diagnosed with MS, their clinician will typically prescribe a medication referred to as 
a disease-modifying therapy (DMT). DMTs are used to modify the disease course, treat relapses, and 
manage symptoms. Growing evidence indicates that early and ongoing treatment with DMTs is the best 
way to prevent the accumulation of disability and protect the brain from permanent damage due to MS. 
 
Despite more than 20 DMTs on the market for relapsing MS, including some generics, the prices of DMTs 
continue to rise. The price of MS treatments has dramatically risen since the first DMT was approved in 
1993 and entered the market at approximately $11,500. In 2013, the average price of MS DMTs was 
around $60,000 per year; in 2016 the median price of brand DMTs increased to $80,000; and just seven 
years later in 2022, the brand median price is nearly $97,942. Six of the DMTs have increased in price 
more than 200% since they came on the market, with eleven now priced at more than $100,000 per 
year. The continually escalating prices of MS DMTs are creating barriers to people with MS getting these 
life-changing medications. In a 2019 survey conducted by the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, 40% of 
respondents reported that they have altered the use of their DMTs due to cost by skipping or delaying 
treatment, taking less than prescribed, or even stopping their treatment altogether. Because of the 
financial burden placed on people living with MS, many are forced to delay retirement or are less able to 
save and create a financial safety net for themselves as they age. These cost trends clearly highlight an 
issue in our healthcare system that must be addressed. 
 
 
 
While we applaud the efforts of this committee in undertaking this complex issue, as written this 
legislation will be very limited in scope. Allowing reference to the maximum fair price as laid out in the 
Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 will inevitably help to save both the state and consumers money but the 
number of drugs that will be identified is quite low and will leave many behind, still facing astronomical 
drug costs. In order to truly address the issue of drug costs in the state, the National Multiple Sclerosis 
Society (the Society) recommends expanding the power of Maine’s Prescription Drug Affordability Board 
(MPDAB) to allow for the setting of upper payment limits in the state (UPLs). The MPDAB would still be 
able to reference to data turned out by other states’ prescription drug affordability boards (PDABs) and 
the maximum fair price, but they would additionally be able to target the drugs that specifically cost the 
most to Mainers.  
 
The Society applauds the efforts in both of these bills to ensure that savings is passed through to the 
consumer. With the rising cost of healthcare in the United States, it is critical that we take every 
opportunity to provide Mainers with more affordable care. Passing the savings back to consumers helps 
to ensure that they see lower out-of-pocket costs and will hopefully help to ensure that they remain 
financially independent. 
 
Please contact me if I can be of further assistance: laura.hoch@nmss.org  or (475) 400-0870.  
  
 
 
  
 
 
