3 - 
5 5 Senator Anne Carney /3/at 3 State House Station 
‘ye/tale ﬂ% Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Ofﬁce (207) 287-1515 
Senate .@12iéu'cl Z9 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing 
LD 405, An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation, Shutdown 
or Lockdown 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
March 6, 2023 
Chairs Beebe-Center, Salisbury, and esteemed members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, I am Anne Carney, representing Senate District 29, which 
includes South Portland, Cape Elizabeth and part of Scarborough. I am grateful to be with 
you today to introduce LD 405, “An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to 
Evacuation, Shutdown or Lockdown. ” 
On Tuesday, November 15, 2022, Sanford High School was subject to a false report of an 
active shooter in the school. Students, teachers, staff, and parents who started receiving “I 
love you” messages from their kids all believed, for a period of time, that their lives were 
in danger. According to city ofﬁcials, the Sanford dispatch center received a phone call at 
8:20 a.m. from someone reporting an active shooter dressed in a black coat and black 
pants, with a long riﬂe on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the high school. 
Portland was next, with a 911 call reporting an active shooter in Portland High School 
that came into a dispatch center at 8:31 a.m. The school immediately went into lockdown. 
All of Portland Depa1tment ’s on-duty officers were sent to the school. Soon, other 
schools in Maine received false active shooter reports. 
Within a shoit period of time that morning, students, teachers, and staff from Fort 
Fairﬁeld to Sanford went into lockdown. Public safety officials rushed to schools 
anticipating an active shooter and multiple injuries. In total, ten Maine schools were 
impacted; 5,679 students were the victims of these threats. 
In Sanford, students were evacuated from Sanford High over the course of two hours, as 
ofﬁcers searched the school room by room. Buses took the students to a safe location, 
where hundreds of parents waited to be reunited with them. The false reports created fear 
and confusion at each school. According to a Portland Press Herald article, a student on
1
the unofﬁcial Gardiner-area Facebook page, Wrote of “lots of police presence ” and said 
she and her classmates were “barricading the door” and “have no idea what’s happening. ” 
Every one of these reports Was false. There was no shooter at any of the ten schools, and 
no physical injury of students, teachers, and staff. Every report, however, caused stress, 
trauma, and a massive public safety response. Bangor Daily News opinion editor Susan 
Young reacted to the false reports by noting: “School shootings are tragically frequent, 
and any reports of an active shooter in a school send ripples of fear and worry through 
communities, ” and even when caused by a false report, “lockdowns like Tuesday’s have 
a detrimental impact on students, teachers, law enforcement and others.” 
Jonathan Sahrbeck, serving as Cumberland County District Attorney, reached out to me 
shortly after these incidents with a concern that under current Maine law, the false reports 
of November 15, 2022, probably were not covered by Maine’s False public alarm or 
report statute, 17-A MRS §509. Why? Because Maine’s False public alarm or report law 
statute has not been updated since 1977, prior to Widespread use of the 9-l-l system.1 Mr. 
Sahrbeck, Shira Burns with the Maine Prosecutor ’s Association, AAG Laura Yustak, 
Rep. Vicki Doudera, Major Gosselin of the Maine State Police, and others worked to 
shape this legislation; their help and contributions are greatly appreciated. 
LD 405, as represented in the amendment that is before you today, does the following: 
1. Updates Maine’s existing False public alarm or report statute, 17-A MRS §509 to 
include two common cham1els through which false reports, including some of the 
November 15, 2022 reports, come in: 
» 
Current A - C LD 405 A-C 
0 any law enforcement ofﬁcer 0 any law enforcement ofﬁcer 
0 an emergency communications center, 
as deﬁned in Title 25, section 2921, 
subsection 4-A 
0 the enhanced 9-l-l services 
established in Title 25, chapter 352 
2. Broadens the list of personnel responding to the request: 
Current LD 405 
A. the officer A. the officer 
0 any other emergency services 
personnel 
B. law enforcement ofﬁcer or B. law enforcement ofﬁcer, a member of 
member of a ﬁre ﬁghting agency a ﬁreﬁghting agency 
1 
NENA, https://www.nena.org/pa£§e; ’911o\rerviem/facts
2
0 any other emergency services 
personnel 
C. any government agency or C. any government agency, public utility 
public utility that deals with that deals with emergencies involving 
emergencies involving danger to danger to life or property 
life or property 0 other emergency services personnel 
3. Increases violation from misdemeanor to Class C if the false report: 
Current y LD 405 
Class D misdemeanor Class C crime if violation: 
0 causes the evacuation, shutdown or 
lockdown of a public place or 
¢ generates an emergency response 
' 
from a law enforcement, ﬁre or other 
emergency services personnel 
These changes in the statute will bring Maine’s False public alarm or report statute into 
line With current emergency reporting systems including the widespread use of the 9-1-l 
system. It will ensure that our laws apply When a false alarm is made to a law 
enforcement ofﬁcer, emergency communications center, ﬁreﬁghting agency, EMS, or 
government agency that deals with emergencies, and provide both an enforcement 
mechanism and deterrent effect. 
Thank you for your consideration today. I urge the committee to vote ought to pass as 
amended on LD 405, and am happy to answer your questions. 
0»u~_. Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
\
