20160165.1 
20160165.2 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Support to L.D. 405,  
An Act To Prevent False Reporting Leading To Evacuation, Shutdown 
Or Lockdown 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 6, 2023
submitting  testimony  on  behalf  of  the  Maine  Chiefs  of  Police  Association  in Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is 
Charles Rum sey, and I am the Chief of the Cum berland Police Department. I am  
Support of LD 405.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in 
law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of 
Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill amends the crime of false public alarm or report by including 
making a false public alarm or report to the enhanced 9-1-1 services and 
by making the offense a Class C crime if the violation causes the 
evacuation, shutdown or lockdown of a building, school, public square or 
park, place of assembly or public transportation facility or generates an 
emergency response from a law enforcement officer or agency, a firefighter 
or firefighting agency or any other emergency services personnel. 
We support LD 405 because we believe our country is on high alert. We hear 
from citizens every day that they are worried for their children in schools, their 
family in public spaces or friends at a concert. We respond to every call with 
urgency because we know that every minute counts. These calls can take a 
tremendous amount of resources and even more so when we have to evacuate, 
shutdown or lock down a space.  
LD 405 is a necessary statutory change because people deserve peace of mind, 
and they are not getting that with the increasing number of calls that make false 
reports. For example, this year we had to evacuate multiple schools across the State 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20160165.1 
20160165.2 in one week. We had to treat each one like the potential catastrophe that it 
thankfully did not turn out to be. We responded to these calls as if it were going to 
be a catastrophe and we will continue to respond as if it is going to be a catastrophe. 
But we believe that a much stronger deterrent to making these false reports needs 
to be in place, because we need to make sure resources are available when there is 
an actual catastrophe. LD 405 is that deterrent.  
We also support the amendment that Senator Carney proposed. We believe any 
amendment that broadens the scope of the false reports is better for public safety. 
For example, the majority of the false reports made about schools recently were 
made to business lines of the police departments and not through 911.  We would 
support all amendments that further deter false reports to all emergency personnel.  
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in favor of LD 405. And, on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your work on 
this Committee.  
