 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Communi ty Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 405  
 
AN ACT TO PREVENT FALSE REPORTING LEADING TO  
EVACUATION, SHUTDOWN OR LOC KDOWN  
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Committee . I am Eileen King, deput y executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying 
on behalf o f the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association, in support of L.D. 405.  
 
On Tuesday, November 15th of this past year, dozens of schools were victims of swatting. Swatting is w hen a 
person makes a false report that results in the deployment of emergency personnel services . Two districts 
believed there were active shooters in their buildings. The buildings went i nto lock down and appropriate 
actions were taken to keep students an d staff safe. It wasn’t long until they realized that they had received 
false reports. However, in the time it took to verify that the reports were false, hundreds of students and 
educators  were traumatized as they locked themselves in classrooms  fearing  for their live s. Parents flocked to 
the schools to wait to see if their child ren were alive . State troopers, sheriff  departments , and  police 
dispatched personnel to the schools , and some are a hospitals prepared for mass  casualties. There was a sigh o f 
relief that day when we realized that this was a hoax, but this hoax cause d the same reaction as if it had been 
real. Later that night, a colleague shared with me that his daughter told him t hat she thought that she was 
going to die that day.  
 
The eve nts of November 15th caused needless trauma  and anxiet y. Some of our students and staff still live 
with the fears and images from that day. Our organizations support L .D. 405 and encourage that th e weight of 
the law be applied to anyone who engages in swat ting or who knowingly causes the evacuation of our schools 
and other gathering places that generates the emergency response from emergency services personnel.  
