TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL 
JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
LD 405, An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation, Shutdown or 
Lockdown 
March 6, 2023 
Katya Fromuth, Yarmouth 
Chairwomen and members of The Joint Standing Committee, I testify today in 
support of L.D. 405 “An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation, 
Shutdown or Lockdown ”. 
My name is Katya Frornuth and I in my first year of High School in Yarmouth, 
Gun violence at schools is an epidemic that has impacted the lives of thousands of 
children and parents. A study conducted by the Pew Research Center in 2018 
found that over 50% of teens fear their school could be the next on news headlines. 
And, in light of recent events, I can now count myself as one of the 50%. On 
November 18th, a swatting hoax was called into my high school, resulting in 
canceled classes. Three days later, I was at my desk during second period when 
two loud pops echoed through the halls. My ﬁrst thought was not of construction or 
noisy classmates. Instead, it was “oh no, is that a gun?” . The fear from that 
moment was indescribable. I remember thinking to myself, “l’m on the second 
ﬂoor, what if I can’t get to the stairs in time.” 
Thankfully, that morning, the gun was just a loud paper towel dispenser. However, 
so many other students haven’t been that lucky. Since November 18th of 2022, at 
least 14 school shootings have taken place, resulting in ll deaths and many more 
traumatized children. In less than a hundred days, more people died in a school 
shooting than in 2015 and 2016 combined. 
Because of this, the parents of children around the country are now forced to 
wonder every morning at school drop off, if the unimaginable will suddenly 
become far too real. If their child will arrive home safely, or not. When parents, 
teachers, and especially students have to worry for their lives in a place that isso
\ 
fundamental to educating and protecting the next generation, the problem has 
already become bigger than it ever should have. 
However, I’m sure I need not tell you that Maine has gotten lucky. We have not yet 
fallen victim to a school shooting, only terrifying hoaxes. But since 1999, three 
hundred thousand children have been in school during a shooting, according to the 
Washington Post. That statistic, though, does not include the trauma inﬂicted on 
children and staff impacted by hoaxes, such as the ones in Sanford or Portland this 
past November. Even if the threat is fake, the fear is real. 
LD 405 would make a call that results in emergency services coming to school, a 
felony. Doing this would send a message to copycats of hoaxes around the World 
that We will not tolerate any more of this domestic terrorism. Closing the gap that 
current swatting hoax laws have left With LD 405 is a step our state can take to 
prove that We will not let our parents, teachers, and children go through what so 
many others already have. 
Thank you for your time.
