 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 405 (Support)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 405, An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation, Shutdown or Lockdown    
 
DA: March 6, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in support of LD 405. 
 
 CLAC agrees that ther e is a gap between the terrorizing and false public alarm or report 
statutes such that , depending on the situation, some conduct commonly known as “swatting ” might 
not be captured by the current language  of those two statutes .   Members are aware that such 
incidents  result in significant costs and trauma to both civilians and emergency responders, and as 
well as create th e potential for serious personal injury.   
 
 Some CLAC members thought the language might more appropriately fit within the 
terrorizing statute at 17 -A M.R.S. § 210, which includes a variation applicable to threats that  result 
in evacuation  of a building , place of assembly or facility of public t ransport, or  that cause the 
occupants of a building to be moved to or remain in a designated secure area.    In contrast to 
terrorizing, the false public report statute and proposal do not require that the person making the 
report make a “threat ,” so the conduct typically considered to be swatting may also fit within the 
false public alarm sta tute as proposed.  It  is important that new prop osal include the requirement 
that the person knows the information is false  (which this proposal does include)  so as not to be 
overly broad  or criminalize protected speech.    
 
 The language of th e LD specifically refers to  public square or park as locatio ns to be 
protected .  Depending on the circumstances, these might also be considered as “places of assembly” 
within the terrorizing statute  (thus  the terrorizing statute should not be read to exclude such 
locations ).   The LD references “shutdown  or lockdown”; these terms seem to capture the concepts 
articulated in the terrorizing statute as well.    It may be helpful to use the most inclusive terms in a 
consistent way in both statutes.   CLAC members are happy to assist with or review any proposed 
revision s as the Committee requests.   
  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Le gislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, pro secutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
 
 the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Publ ic Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile C odes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
