 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 405 – Ought  Not To Pass  
 
An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation,  
Shutdown or Lockdown  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
March 6 , 202 3 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on  Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My 
name is Michael Kebede , and I am Policy Counsel  for the American Civil Liberties 
Union of Maine, a statewid e organization committed to advancing and preserving 
civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to oppose LD 405, legislation that creates a new  felony  but 
would not prevent the behavior it seeks to  stop.  
 
LD 405 creates a n offense titled “aggravated false public alarm .” A person commits 
this felony if they intentionally make a false statement to law enforcement or 
emergency services and that statement causes a school or other building to be 
evacuated or shut down  or prompts an emergency response .  
 
We appreciate that an evacuation or lockdown in —for example —a school or college 
dorm  can be traumatic  and an inefficient use of emergency services . But expanding 
our criminal legal system i s an ineffective and unnecessary way to prevent or 
address those harms. There is little  evidence that making something a felony 
disincentivizes behavior. And the statute as written  already criminalizes making 
false reports regardless of whether the receiving emergency service acts on the 
report —the people criminalized by this bill are already criminalized by the rest of 
the statute.  
 
Conversely, creating a new crime has concrete, r ealized harms: it has a 
disproportionate effect on those who are already marginalized, does not actually 
prevent undesirable behavior, and places even more power in the hands of a 
criminal legal system that is not equipped to address systemic societal harms even 
when it is not teetering on collapse (as Maine’s currently is ). Because this bill would 
not pr event the behavior it seeks to prevent and instead would grow our already 
overloaded  criminal legal system, we urge you to vote ought not to pass . 
 
