Peggy L. McGehee 
21 Stonecrest Drive 
Falmouth, Maine 04105 March 5, 2023 
Testimony in SUPPORT of L.D. 405 -- An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to 
Evacuation, Shutdown or Lockdown 
Dear Senate Chair Beebe-Center; House Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee: 
I am a recently retired attorney who has lived for 43 years in Maine, where my husband 
and I have raised 4 children and have 2 Maine grandchildren. I applaud the legislators who have 
brought forward the various gun safety bills that this Committee will be considering in this 
Legislative Session. The school mass shootings in other states in recent years, and the swatting 
public false alarms that caused the lockdown of ten schools in our State last fall, do not reﬂect 
the world any of us want for our children and grandchildren. It is up to us in Maine--gtm owners 
and non-gun owners-- Democrats and Republicans-- to do what we can, consistent with the 2d 
Amendment, to protect our children from unstable and malicious hoaxers—and shooters. 
I therefore support the passage of this bipartisan L.D. 405, amending 17-A M.R.S.A. 
§509 to extend the crime of making hoax calls to law enforcement, ﬁreﬁghting and emergency 
agencies, to such calls also made to 9-l -1 services. Many of the hoax swatting calls made in 
Maine last November were to the 9-1-1 centers that are not currently named in the statute. Thus, 
it only makes sense to add them, as L.D. 405 proposes. It also makes sense to amend L.D. 405 
itself to include, as recommended by the Maine State Police in its testimony, “business 
communication lines” of any emergency communications center, given that some of the hoax 
calls last November were made to police “business ” lines. L.D. 405 could be strengthened even 
further if it were amended to include hoax calls made directly to schools.
I would also like to comment on the testimony submitted by the Maine Association of 
Criminal Defense Lawyers (“MACDL”) opposing L.D. 405. MACDL objects to L.D. 405 
adding a new, higher level, Crime C to Section 509’s current Class D crimes, for when the false 
public alarm is “aggravated ” by causing “the evacuation, shutdown or lockdown ” of schools or 
other public areas and buildings. MACDL asserts that such aggravated hoaxes “do not need to be 
full-blown Class C felonies, ” as in the past there has been “no judge, much less really any 
prosecutor, who has ever indicated that the punishment that they are allowed to impose [witha 
Class D crime] cannot meet the crime.” However, school lockdowns caused by active-shooter 
swatting calls, are increasing, including in Maine, and they cause severe, widespreadltrauma to 
students, teachers, parents and medical personnel~ —and to law enforcement ofﬁcers. (All 40 on~ 
duty Portland police officers rushed to Portland High School when the November hoax call 
reported an active shooter in the school, and doctors prepared their emergency rooms to be ready 
to help save students who had been shot.) 
It is already a Class C crime to threaten “a crime of violence dangerous to human life” 
when such terrorizing threat causes “evacuation ” of a building. l7-A M.R.S.A. §2l0. It is alsoa 
Class C crime to stalk two or more people “that are members of an identiﬁable group” causing 
them emotional distress, or fear of injury or death. 17-A M.R.S.A. §210-A (l)(D). The hoax 
calls that would be targeted by L.D. 405 cause fear and trauma on at least the same scale and to 
the same extent as these existing Class C crimes, so that the upgrade in classiﬁcation for hoax 
calls that cause lockdowns is entirely appropriate. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments in support of L.D. 405. 
Peggy L. McGehee
