Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Testimony of Maine Transgender Network
LD 405: An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation, Shutdown or
Lockdown
March 6, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and
Public Safety Committee: my name is Quinn Gormley, I am the Executive Director of the Maine
Transgender Network, and I am testifying today on behalf of MaineTransNet today in support of
LD 405, An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacuation, Shutdown or Lockdown.
In approaching this bill, our first reaction is one of sadness for our State and our Country that
this is even an issue that merits consideration. The use of violence and the threat of violence is
all too commonplace in our society, and the use of false reporting to wreak havoc and to utilize
the tools of the state such as police to inflict harm on people and communities is nothing new.
That being said, in recent years, the unique terror of false reporting, bombing and shooting
threats has been increasingly common, with minority communities and those allied with us as
targets.
The targeting of schools and health clinics that support transgender students and young people
has been a major concern in the last several months, with school districts here in Maine
experiencing falsely reported bomb threats and clinics,  LGBTQ+ community centers, and trans
serving mental health agencies the nation over experiencing similar threats. The sole purpose of
these threats is to disrupt the work of these institutions. It impacts patient care, student's
education, and the wellbeing of teachers, doctors, nurses, and countless other professionals
who are just doing their jobs.
For this reason, such threats must be understood as an extension of the political violence being
perpetrated against transgender Americans, our families, and our providers, that is attempting to
erase us from public life in this country. These attempts occur through legal and political action,
but via false reports, they extend to terrorism. Such terrorism must be met with the force of law.
Our state and our country cannot cede ground. We are capable of better than this. We urge you
to vote Ought to Pass on LD 405.
Thank you,
Quinn Gormley
quinn@mainetransnet.org

