STATE OF MAINE
Department of Public Safety
MAINE STATE POLICE
45 Commerce Drive - Suite 1
Augusta, Maine 04333
INTEGRITY                FAIRNESS       COMPASSION      EXCELLENCE         Janet T. Mills
Governor
  Michael J. Sauschuck
 Commissioner
Acting COL. Bill G. Ross
Chief
LTC. Brian P. Scott
Deputy Chief
NEITHER FOR – NOR AGAINST LD 405 AN ACT TO PREVENT FALSE REPORTING LEADING TO EVACUATION, 
SHUTDOWN OR LOCKDOWN  
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Major Scott Gosselin and I am submitting this letter 
on behalf of the Maine State Police and the Department of Public Safety as Neither For – Nor Against LD 
405 AN ACT TO PREVENT FALSE REPORTING LEADING TO EVACUATION, SHUTDOWN OR LOCKDOWN.
As currently written, this bill would add the 911 system to the list of those persons or places where, if 
made, false reports or false public alarms could result in a charge of either a Class D crime or a Class C 
crime if it causes the evacuation, shutdown or lockdown of specific buildings or locations.  Our 
experience with these kinds of calls leads us to believe that a false report or false public alarm is just as 
likely to come through our business communication lines as through the 911 system.  I have been working 
with Brodie Hinckley, the Public Safety Bureau Director of Consolidated Emergency Communications in 
review of the language for this bill.  Our only suggestion for this bill as originally written was to include 
the business lines of any Emergency Communication Center as a means through which application of 
this statute would apply.  We have been working with the bill sponsor, Senator Anne Carney on a 
definition for Emergency Communications Centers and language which would include business lines at 
those centers.  Senator Carney has been very receptive and supportive of these changes and we hope they 
will appear in a coming amendment to this original language.  
This past fall as students returned to school here in Maine, you might remember the false report or false 
alarms that were received by the Emergency Communications Centers as related to school shootings that 
were actively occurring at several high schools across the state.  Business communications lines were 
used for those hoax reports which caused a great deal of alarm, consternation, and evacuation of schools 
across the State of Maine.  The current wording for this bill does not include business lines.  If the false 
public report or alarm resulted in evacuation of certain places, such as schools in this case, this bill also 
creates the crime of Aggravated False Public Alarm or Report which will allow officers the ability to charge 
a Class C felony crime in those instances as we saw this fall.  
If an amendment is added to this bill which would include the business communication lines for those 
Emergency Communications Centers as a means through which this statute would apply, we would 
support this bill.  For this reason, I urge you to consider an amendment to LD 405 which would add the 
necessary language to include those false reports and false public alarms made through the business 
communications lines at any Maine Emergency Communications Center statewide.
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank you for your time.
