  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L . Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasure r 
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secretary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mat tson 
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 February 16, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe- Center, Chair  
Representative S uzanne Salisbury 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436 
Augusta, ME 04330 
 
RE: LD 405 --  An Act to Prevent False Reporting Leading to Evacu ation, 
            Shutdown or Lockdown 
 
Dear Senator Beebe- Center , Representative Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Public Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 405. 
 
While  false reports th at cause evacuations or shutdowns ar e serious matters, they do 
not need to be full -blown Class C felonies.  As it stands now, an offense like this 
would be considered a Class D cri me, punishable by up to 364 days in jail.  There i s 
no suggestion that someone wa s convicted of  this crime  and a judge  felt some 
constraint in sentencing because the person could only be sentenced to a jail sentence 
of 364 days.  Making a crime like this a  felony absent any need to do so would only 
serve to promote the further feloni zation of crimes in our Criminal Code.  Certainly 
anyone can come before this Committee and indicate th at a particular crime is terrible 
and deserves punishment, but before a cr ime is made a felony this Committee needs 
to take a strong hard look at whet her the current level of crime is insufficient.  
 
There i s no insufficiency here.  A person coming before a judge having been 
convicted of the Class D crime of false public alarm or  report is a  person who can go 
to jail for a significant perio d of time an d pay a hefty fine.  Over 30 years, I have seen 
countless false public alarm or report c ases and their sentencings.  There is no judge, 
much less really any  prosecutor, who has ever indicated th at the punishment that they 
are allowed to impose  cannot meet the crime.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  

