Amanda Lewis
Kittery Point
LD 1836
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee. I am testifying in support of LD 1836.
I am Dr Amanda Lewis, a breast radiologist and Medical Director of York Hospital 
Breast Care and the president of the Maine Radiological Society.
I have been a breast radiologist in York for nearly thirteen years and will tell you 1st 
hand of the tremendous impact on patients throughout Maine this legislation will have
by providing financial access of care  to life-saving breast cancer imaging.
At our facility there are many women who will not come in for their breast imaging 
because they have a symptom, a lump or mass in their breast, because they know a 
diagnostic exam will not be covered. Women are afraid to incur a significant financial
burden due to the cost of this life-saving diagnostic exam.  Think about that. A person
has a symptom, a lump, and their exam is not covered.
We had a patient last month who felt a breast lump.  She had her imaging workup and
received an appropriate diagnostic mammogram and ultrasound, and everything 
looked good. None of it was covered. She did everything right and now has a medical 
bill that she can not easily pay.
Some women wait months with a lump in their breast until their screening 
mammogram is due, because it is covered. They will hide their symptoms.  With the 
complexity of reading a mammogram, the more accurate information given the 
radiologist, the better the outcome for the patient.  These patients would not receive 
the appropriate diagnostic imaging workup, based on proven guidelines. Their breast 
cancer could be missed.
A patient I saw a few weeks ago presented through the emergency room for shortness 
of breath. The ER also noticed an ulcerating mass breaking through the skin of her 
breast. She had waited. Our task was to evaluate for breast cancer. It was.
Another patient in her 40s months back presented in the ER with back pain. She also 
had a large breast mass. She had a diagnostic imaging evaluation and a biopsy. It was 
stage 4 cancer. She waited because of the cost.
Patients who are presented to breast care from the ER are happening all over the state.
This is not an isolated event. Women are not getting the life-saving imaging they need
when they have symptoms because they can not afford it.
There are decades of research showing the effectiveness of breast imaging ( 
mammography,  ultrasound and MRI) in early breast cancer detection.
Some quick statistics:
Annual screening mammography from ages 40 to 84 years yields a mortality 
reduction of 40% compared to no screening.
Adding screening breast ultrasound in patients who have dense breast tissue detects 
1-3 more cancers per thousand. This is significant, up to 50% more cancers. These 
cancers tend to be caught earlier, node negative and sub-centimeter in size.
Finding cancers earlier gives a better chance for cure, and leads to fewer devastating 
radical mastectomies and less patients needing chemotherapy, both expensive 
interventions.  Finding early stage cancers also decreases the amount of time in 
treatment and quickens recovery. This increases their time as a mother, a worker, and 
a contributor to Maine's society and economy.
As a breast radiologist working in the front lines, I strongly urge you to pass LD 
1836. This is one piece of legislation where you can and will save lives.
 
