 
 
 
Written Testimony Supporting LD1836  
Submitted to the Committee On Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
May 8, 2023  
By Susan G. Komen  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee , 
thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of  LD1836 , which relates to coverage of medically necessary  
breast imaging . My name is Angelica Katz  and I am the State Policy & Advocacy  Regional Manager  at Susan G. Komen® . 
 
Komen is the world’s leading nonprofit breast cancer organization representing the millions of people who have been 
diagnosed with breast cancer. Komen has an unmatched, comprehensive 360 -degree approach to fighting this disease 
across all fronts —we advoca te for patients, drive research breakthroughs, improve access to high quality care, offer direct 
patient support and empower people with trustworthy information. Komen is committed to supporting those affected by 
breast cancer today, while tirelessly searc hing for tomorrow’s cures. We advocate on behalf of the estimated 1,450  
people in the Maine  who will be diagnosed with breast cancer and the 190 who will die from the disease in 202 3 alone.  
 
Widespread access to preventive screening mammography i s available to millions of women as a result of the Affordable 
Care Act (ACA). Unfortunately, most individuals at a higher risk of breast cancer or those requiring follow -up imaging due 
to an abnormal mammogram result face  hundreds to thousands of dollars in patient cost sharing  for this required imaging  
– all before they are even potentially diagnosed  with breast cancer . Mammography is only the initial step in the early 
detection process and is not able to alone diagnose c ancer. Early detection of breast cancer is not possible without the 
medically necessary diagnostic follow -up or additional supplemental imaging required to rule out breast cancer or confirm 
the need for a biopsy. An estimated 16 percent of women screened w ith modern digital mammography will require follow -
up imaging.   
 
The use of breast cancer screening and follow -up diagnostics have led to significant increases in the early detection of 
breast cancer in the past 30 years. However, this is not true across all demographics. Evidence shows that commercially 
insured Black b reast cancer patients were diagnosed at a later stage and had a higher mortality rate when compared with 
their white counterparts with the same insurance status.  Additionally, Hispanic women tend to be diagnosed with later 
stage breast cancers than non -Hispanic white women which  may be due to delays in follow -up after an abnormal 
mammogram.  
 
A Komen -commissioned study found the out -of-pocket costs for patients to be high, with much variation for diagnostic 
breast imaging. For example, average patient cost f or a mammogram is $234, and for a breast MRI, $1,021.  The study also 
found that the inconsistency in cost and coverage is a recognized concern among patients, and health  care providers. 
Which leads  to additional stress and confusion for patients who are already dealing with the daunting possibility of a 
breast cancer diagnosis.  
 
Unfortunately, we often receive calls and emails from individuals  who are unable to afford the out -of-pocket costs for 
their recommended breast  imaging. Without assistance, many will simply delay or forego these medically necessary  tests . 
This delay can mean that patients will not seek care until the cancer has spread making it much deadlier and much more 
costly to treat.  Breast cancer can be up to five times more expensive to treat when it has spread beyond the breast to 
other parts of the body.  
 
Additionally, screening delays and cancellations during the  COVID -19 pandemic have raised concerns about associated 
incre ases in  “missed’ and  late-stage cancer diagnoses and mortality. Although we don’t know the full impact of the 
 
 pandemic, emerging data in the two years since the pandemic has reinforced these concerns . The potentially  “missed” 
cancers could  be larger and m ore advanced once ultimately detected, often requiring the use of diagnostic imaging.  
 
As committed partners in the fight against breast cancer, we know how deeply important it is for all cancer patients to 
have fair and equitable  access to the breast imaging  that may save their lives. As such, we support LD1836  and urge you 
to pass this critical legislation.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
