 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Written Testimony Supporting LD1836  
Submitted to the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee  
5-8-2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD1836, which relates to coverage of 
medically necessary breast imaging. My name is Kim Czubaruk, Senior Direc tor, Strategy and Policy at Cancer Care , 
the leading national organization providing free, professional support services and information to help people 
manage the emotional, practical, and financial challenges of cancer. In 2022, our staff answered more than 38,000 
calls to our helpline and served clients with 90 different types of cancer, from all 50 states. Our comments are 
informed by the stories we hear from our clients as they navigate the confusing, expensive, and frustrating process 
of accessing an d paying for vital – and sometimes life -saving – cancer care and treatment.   
 
Under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), access to preventive screening mammography is available to millions of women 
who are at higher risk of breast cancer. However, individuals re quiring follow -up imaging due to an abnormality or 
mass detected during the mammography will have to face hundreds to thousands of dollars in patient cost sharing 
for the necessary follow -up imaging  – all before they are even potentially diagnosed with bre ast cancer.  
 
LD 1836 will eliminate out of pocket costs for diagnostic and supplemental imaging examinations for breast cancer. 
This legislation has already passed in nearly a dozen other states and will have a profound impact for eliminating 
healthcare b arriers for Mainers.  
 
This bill does not create a new coverage mandate, it addresses cost -share requirements for health plans that already 
provide coverage for screening and diagnostic services. The bill ensures that patients who need this follow -up for 
medically necessary reasons , do not forego the test due to unaffordable out -of-pocket costs.  
 
Breast Cancer is one of the most diagnosed cancers in Maine  and treatment  can be highly effective when the disease 
is caught  early . This legislation is crucial to  provide Mainers to fight this disease by  eliminat ing financial barriers for 
them  to receive their diagnosis early and receive their necessary treatment  options.    
 
I strongly urge you to support LD1836  to ensure breast cancer patients and survivors have the best possible chance 
to fight this disease . 
 
Thank you for your time  and your thoughtful consideration of this important legislation.   
 
