 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  May 8, 2023 
 
SUPPORT – LD 1836, An Act Regarding Insurance Coverage for Diagnostic and Supplemental 
Breast Examinations  
 
Good morning, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and the members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance, and Financial Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, I am the Public 
Health and Government Affairs Associate with the Maine Medical Association and I live in 
Windham. The MMA appreciates the opportunity to share the following comments in support of 
LD 1839. This bill would require coverage without cost sharing for supplemental breast 
examinations or diagnostic breast examinations.  
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. During our 
legislative priority determination process our members from the Maine Radiological Society 
noted this was at the top of their list. Our members told us they had patients with dense breast 
tissue who were hesitant to come in for their annual screening mammography for fear of the 
additional costs of a diagnostic examination. A Boston study found 21% of women who get 
abnormal findings on their mammogram screening will not get follow-up diagnostics if a 
deductible is involved. Other patients had to pay expensive out of pocket costs because they 
required additional breast examinations for genetic mutations, such as BRCA1 and BRCA 2, 
that gave them a higher chance of developing breast cancer.  
 
Coverage for screening mammograms is currently required because it is a preventative tool for 
detecting breast cancer. This coverage has saved countless lives and has put many others at 
ease of mind knowing they are cancer-free. However, for those with dense breast tissue, genetic 
mutations, or other risks, a screening mammogram is not sufficient to detect breast cancer, other 
medical conditions, or give them ease of mind.  
 
A patient may have good insurance, but because of her dense breast tissue, she may have to 
pay anywhere from $300 to $1,100 a year for follow-up screening including ultrasounds and 3D 
mammography. 
 
Women who have higher breast density, rather than fat, have an amplified risk of breast cancer. 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Studies show dense breast tissue eclipses all other known breast cancer risk factors. A 
screening mammography may not detect abnormalities in dense breast tissue because dense 
breast tissue presents white, abnormalities also present white. Some compare finding 
abnormalities in dense breast tissue in a mammography to trying to find a snowflake in a blizzard.  
 
Preventive screenings save lives, but with about 50% of women having dense breast tissue, 
screening mammograms alone are not enough to prevent. Diagnostic screenings are used for 
women who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple discharge, change in shape or size. 
These symptoms are common, and many may overlook them or ignore them because of the 
potential high costs associated with diagnostic examinations. Coverage for diagnostic and 
supplemental breast examinations will not only support women to come in for their annual 
screening mammogram but will also lend the physician support at detecting and preventing 
breast cancer.  
 
About 43,700 women will die from breast cancer. 1 in 8 women will develop breast cancer in her 
lifetime. Since 1990, research has shown mammograms have saved between 384,000 and 
614,500 lives – this is despite the fact screening mammograms miss 1 in 8 breast cancers. 
Providing coverage for these additional examinations will save more lives and improve health 
outcomes for many Mainers. For these reasons, the Maine Medical Association supports the 
passage of LD 1836 and asks the committee for a favorable vote.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention today. We welcome any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer  
