Written Testimony Supporting LDl836 
Submitted to the Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Service Committee 
5-8-2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Services Committee, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of 
LDl836, which relates to coverage of medically necessary breast imaging. My name is Nicole 
Pietro, and I am a resident of Kennebec Country and a student at Colby College. 
In 2001, doctors in Boston diagnosed my late aunt, Wendy Dorr, a resident of Machias, Maine, at 
the time, with breast cancer. She was then treated in Boston for her ﬁrst mastectomy. At that 
time, she could not ﬁnd reliable detection services in Maine. 
About ﬁve years later, her cancer returned, and she began to travel to Bangor, Maine for both 
detection and treatment, which was two hours away from her residence. This team at Bangor 
ended up working with a team at Dana Farber, so she had to come down periodically to be tested 
there as well. The doctors in Boston were the ones who discovered that her cancer had spread to 
her lungs. She ended up moving to Bangor to be close to the Northern Light Lafayette Family 
Cancer Institute in order to be closer to treatment. 
In September of 2019, my aunt Wendy passed away after her long battle with cancer. During her 
life, she was an advocate of the Beth Wright Resource Center in Ellsworth and was active with 
the Machias Resource Room, both of which provide aid to cancer patients. 
LDl836 will make necessary diagnostic testing more accessible for women living in Maine now, 
and it is absolutely critical to pass this legislation. Given that 40% of Maine’s population resides 
in rural areas, we need to make medically necessary services accessible and affordable. This bill, 
LDl836, could provide one less challenge and ﬁnancial barrier for women looking for diagnosis 
of their breast cancer and help survivors throughout the state.. 
Thank you so much for your time and consideration.
