 
 
 
 
RE: LD 1836 – SUPPORTING ACCESS TO BREAST CANCER SCREENING 
 
Dear Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
 
On behalf of RAYUS Radiology, a network of multi-modality diagnostic imaging centers, that operates 11 advanced 
imaging centers across Maine, I am writing you today in strong support of the provision of LD 1836 which looks to 
expand access to health care services regarding the diagnosis of breast cancer by prohibiting cost-sharing requirements for 
follow-up diagnostic mammography.  
 
Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women and, if not caught and treated early, is deadly. Due 
to restrictions on elective procedures and the following delays in screening, nearly one third of women missed their annual 
screening mammography during the COVID-19 pandemic. (Lowry KP, 2022) 
 
Now, studies from oncologists have shown patients are presenting with more advanced-stage cancers – one showed that 
1.9% of patients presented with stage IV breast cancer in 2019, 6.2% did in 2020, a threefold increase. Further, studies 
have shown patients who may have received an initial abnormal screening did not receive follow-up screenings ranged 
from nearly a 25% to over 70%. (Zhou JZ, 2022) (Reece, 2021) 
 
Cost remains the largest factor in missed follow-up care - A Komen-commissioned study found the costs to patients for 
diagnostic tests range from $234 for a diagnostic mammogram to $1,021 for a breast MRI. The disparity in follow-up was 
found to be higher in disadvantaged and underserved communities. This additional cost can be especially onerous for 
patients who are breast cancer survivors, as higher modalities of screening are recommended over regular mammography. 
(Susan G. Komen Foundation, 2019) 
 
More than ever, we must work to eliminate all barriers to care, and a patient’s inability to pay should not prevent them 
from obtaining a potential lifesaving, and cost saving, early diagnosis. This legislation to ensure patient access to 
diagnostic mammography, like breast MR and ultrasound are strongly supported by our radiologist partners and this bill 
will save lives.  
 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
 
 
 
Zachary Brunnert 
Senior Director, State Legislative Policy  
RAYUS Radiology  
 
Works Cited 
Lowry KP, B. M. (2022). Breast Biopsy Recommendations and Breast Cancers Diagnosed 
during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Radiology, 287-294. 
Reece, J. N. (2021). Delayed or failure to follow-up abnormal breast cancer screening 
mammograms in primary care: a systematic review. BMC Cancer, 21. 
Susan G. Komen Foundation. (2019). Understanding Cost & Coverage Issues with 
Diagnostic Breast Imaging. Dallas: Martec. 
 
 
 
 
Zhou JZ, K. S. (2022). Comparison of Early- and Late-Stage Breast and Colorectal Cancer 
Diagnoses During vs Before the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Open Network, 5. 
 
 
