g STATE or MAINE 
: DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY 
§ OFFICE or TI-IE COMMISSIONER 
22 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E- BEAL 
GQVERNQR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
Neither For Nor Against LD 157 
LD 15 7, Resolve, to Improve Standards for Animal Rescue Entities 
February 8, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plueker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, I am Ann Gibbs, and I am the former Director of the 
Animal and Plant Health Division at the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
(DACF). I am on contract with the Department until the new Director is hired. I am here today to 
speak Neither for nor Against LD 157, “Resolve, to Improve Standards for Animal Rescue 
Entities.” 
The Animal Welfare Program (AVVP) ensures the humane and proper treatment of animals by 
upholding the animal welfare laws of Maine through communication, education, and 
enforcement. We do this through developing and implementing policies and programs to 
effectively address animal cruelty complaints; inspecting and licensing animal shelters, pet 
stores, kennels, and animal research facilities; and enforcing the licensing of dogs. 
LD 157 proposes that the Department adopt rules that set standards for animal rescue entities, 
including but not limited to dog rescue operations, that specify staff-to-animal ratios and that 
govern animals that are returned multiple times and resold or placed in multiple homes. The 
Department believes that enforceable parameters exist in current law and rule that address 
facilities ’ “capacity of care,” the return of animals to shelters, and their resale. It should also be 
noted that the scope of the language in this bill could impact other entities regulated by other 
state agencies, including Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. 
Generally, current laws and regulations already provide that AWP can determine whether an 
organization cannot keep up with proper caretaking, regardless of the number of staff members 
working or the number of animals (i.e., the facility ’s “capacity of care”). For instance, AWP can 
consider the type and amount of animals in the care of the facility, the speciﬁc needs of the 
animals and whether they require special care, the type of operation, the facility operator and 
staff experience, and more. During an annual inspection or due to a complaint, AWP may also 
enter a shelter/rescue, kennel, or pet shop to examine or conduct tests for diseases. Should AWP
V V DEPARTMENT 37' 
HARLOW Burrnmo Agricuhure PHONE. (207) 28'/-3200 
l8ELk1Ns LANE IQEZIQQ cunservation FAX: (201) 281-2400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE “ 
& Forestry WEB:ww\v.MAmE.oov/nAcr
ﬁnd substandard conditions, a state veterinarian or any licensed veterinarian may issuea 
quarantine for that facility. 
Existing rules also provide AWP with enforceable oversight of shelters, including rescue 
organizations. For instance, animal sellers and providers must furnish written instructions 
regarding proper feeding, care, health information, and any special needs of animals upon 
sale/adoption. 01-001 DACF c. 701(L). The rules also deﬁne conditions when an animal is unﬁt 
for release for sale/adoption, which includes “animals with aggression that pose a risk to public 
safety that cannot be safely managed. . ..” 01-001 DACF c. 70l(M)(6). 
AWP understands that despite current regulatory and statutory frameworks, there is concern 
regarding some animal rescue entities ’ lack of compliance. We are aware of how important and 
complex this issue is before us today and that some states have pursued novel approaches to 
regulating rescue entities. The AWP is willing to work creatively with LD 157’s sponsor to 
consider improvements to the regulation and enforcement of animal rescue operations while 
balancing concerns with the program’s existing resources. 
Thanks for your attention. I am happy to answer questions now or during the work session.
