Dear Senator lngwersen, Representative Pleucker and members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry committee. My name is Charles Shaffer 
and I reside in Sebec. I am testifying today in support of LD 157; Resolve, To 
Improve Standards for Animal Rescue Entities. 
Maine has some of the strictest requirements in the nation regarding the spaying 
and neutering of cats and dogs in the nation. These requirements have resulted in 
a dramatic decrease in the feral dog/cat population. Maine also has strict 
regulations of pet stores and animal breeders and laws that prohibit the sale of 
aggressive or dangerous animals, all with the intent of providing humane 
treatment of all types of animals as well as provide for the safety of Maine 
citizens. However, an unintended consequence of these regulations is that it has 
created a dearth of animals that are available for adoption by l\/laine residents. To 
fill this gap, Maine has become a haven for "rescues" and “shelters ” that scoop up 
feral animals from the streets and shelters of mostly southern states in order to 
sell them to Maine residents. Oddly enough, even though Maine has strict 
requirements for actual pet stores and farming enterprises, these "shelters" 
operate with minimal oversight and regulation by state or local government. 
One example is an operation that is currently located in Sebec. This business 
moved to Maine from Texas, where it would take dogs from the local animal 
shelters in the San Antonio and Fort Worth area and market them to customers 
across several states. The business moved to lvlaine and particularly Sebec 
because there is no zoning, and they would be able to transform a small grooming 
business into a larger operation. They continued to acquire dogs from Texas as 
well as expanded to include dogs from the meat markets of China, Korea and 
Afghanistan. There can be more than 100 dogs and cats at any one time at the 
shelter. They are transported to the business directly from Texas or wherever and 
often do not follow any type of quarantine or separation of newly arrived animals 
from the current animals already here. The staff of this shelter is 1. 
In order to secure a license to operate a "rescue/shelter" , the operator has only 
to provide access to food, water and shelter. There are no minimum size 
requirements of the facility, no requirements for space, no requirement that 
aggressive animals be segregated from the others, no requirement that the actual 
dog area be separate from any area of human habitation and no requirement of
any staff to animal ratio. Think about it; there are ratios for many types of direct 
services. Medical staff to patients, teachers to students, daycare workers to 
children, etc., etc. There are often limits on minimum square footage needed to 
adequately provide for the health and safety of a given population. Call something 
a rescue, tug at some heart strings and the rules seem to go out the window. Until 
there is a problem. The Humane Agents employed by the state that oversee these 
operations have considerable discretion in enforcing any type of regulations and 
often do not take any actions until there is some type of crisis. The news is full of 
these types of incidents around the country. This shelter also often takes 
pregnant dogs from the Texas shelters in order to have puppies to sell, in direct 
violation of Maine's rules that regulate pet stores. Again, with no consequences. 
It is not required that the operator of a rescue/shelter have any education, 
experience, or training before going into business. All you need is a sign and $100. 
There are no industry standards, minimal oversight and spotty enforcement of 
local ordinances. Makes it a very lucrative business. You get the dogs free and sell 
them. ACO's, animal welfare and town officials have a lot of discretion in deciding 
whether to pursue actions against shelters/rescues because there are no uniform 
standards for guidance. 
Regarding aggressive animals. Maine has strict requirements regarding the sale of 
aggressive dogs. Those rules are only enforced against pet shops and licensed 
breeders. In the case of this particular shelter, dogs are often returned to the 
shelter due to aggression and are simply sold to another customer. There is no 
requirement that the dogs be socialized, quarantined, isolated, or otherwise held 
from sale until their temperament is determined and it is up to the shelter 
operator to determine which animals are suitable and which aren't. Last year, one 
dog was sold and returned for aggression 5 times. A veterinarian that treated the 
animal recommended it be euthanized due to its aggressive behavior. It was 
simply sold to another family and the ”shelter" keeps the $650.00 sale price 
(”adoption fee") each time. 
Another darker aspect of the animal rescue world is that it has become a haven 
for people suffering from psychiatric illness, specifically Animal Hoarding Disorder 
(DSM 5 , 300.3 [F42]. There is quite a bit of evidence that many people who run
these shelters suffer from this affliction, living in squalid, unhealthy conditions 
and creating significant health risks to the community. 
While it is clear that there is a demand here in l\/laine for animals to be adopted, 
there needs to be more structure and guidance regarding the operation of 
”rescues/shelters" . l have focused on dogs/cats here but it applies to any animal 
that could potentially end up abandoned and unwanted. l would encourage this 
committee to develop rules regarding the number of animals that can be cared 
for by any one individual (this shelter took in revenues of over $100,000 dollars 
tax free last year; they should be able to hire staff to provide care). I would urge 
this committee to address the issue of selling aggressive animals, especially 
multiple times. There have been people mauled and killed by family pets in the 
recent past, let's do what we can to minimize the risk of this happening in the 
future. I would also encourage the committee to consider the motivating factor in 
many of these rescues is a sign of mental illness that should be addressed. 
I would be happy to provide information or answer questions of the committee if 
needed and to be available for a future work session. 
Thank you for your time today. 
Respectfully; 
Charles Shaffer 
Sebec, Maine
