 
 
February 8 , 2023 
 
RE: Testimony in Opposition to  LD 175 – Resolve, To Improve Standards for Animal Rescue Entities  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Committee : 
 
My name is Katie Lisnik and I am the Executive Director the Greater Androscoggin Humane Society and in 
Lewiston and a board member of the Maine Federation of Humane Societies (MFHS). I am offering  testimony 
in opposition to  LD 157 on behalf of MFHS  whose  board also includes representatives from the Animal Refuge 
League of Greater Portland in Westbrook, Animal Welfare Society in Kennebunk, Bangor Humane Society in 
Bangor, Greater Androsco ggin Humane Society in Lewist on, Humane Society of the United States,  Maine State 
Society for the Protection  of Animals in Windham, PAWS Animal Adoption Center in Camden, Pope Memorial 
Humane Society in Thomaston, and Spirits Place in St. Albans .  
 
Maine law currently includes Rule Chapters for the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
governing animal welfare (Chapter 701) and  governing the sale of dogs and cats and importation of dogs and 
cats for resale or adoption (Chapter 216). They cover animal health requirements, housing standards, disease 
control, record keeping, and more for not just animal shelters and rescues, but al so kennels, breeding kennels, 
and pet shops.  
 
Since this Resolve was first submitted for consideration in the 130th Legislature  (LD 561 ), Chapter 701  was 
amended with an effective date of  January 24, 2022 , and some of th ose updates  address concerns raised  by 
the proponents of LD 157  because it was recognized changes were needed to help ensure any facility with 
animals in its care has the necessary capacity to do so . Most notably , the following was added:    
 
- SECTION IA4 : “Capacity for care” is the level at which each licensed animal facility in Maine 
can maintain the ability to meet the needs of every animal in the care of that facility, 
regardless of purpose, age, health status and personality, and by functioning within this 
level, are able to ensure the he alth and wellness of animals in their care.  
 
- SECTION I N1: All facilities licensed under these rules shall demonstrate proper capacity to 
care for the number of animals under their care upon request from and to the satisfaction 
of the department. In determi ning the adequacy of a facilities’ demonstration of capacity 
for care, the department will take into account, among other relevant factors: the type and 
numbers of animals in the care of the facility; the specific needs of the animals in the care 
of the fa cility and whether they require special care; the type of operation; experience of 
the facility operators and staff; and the size and capacity of the facility; and the occurrence 
of any emergency or disaster situations.  
 
- SECTION I N2: A facility must not ex ceed its capacity for care by, including but not limited to, 
housing more animals for which it has demonstrated a capacity to care for or housing and 
caring for animals that have special needs that the facility operator and/or staff are 
unqualified or othe rwise unable to provide.  
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Additionally, LD 157 asks that certain types of rules be promulgated that while well intended could be prove 
problematic.  For example, specific staff to animal ratios cannot be set broadly across all organizations a s there 
are many factors that go into determining capacity t o care including “ the number of appropriate housing units; 
staffing for programs or services; staff training; average length of stay; and the total number of reclaims, 
adoptions, transfers, release, or other outcomes .” (Guidelines for Standards of Care in Animal Shelters , 2010 at 
p. 12 ) 
 
With respect to requiring rules to govern animals returned multiple times, it is important to note that animals 
may be returned for a whole host of reasons  including divorce, loss of housing, financial issues, house training  
issues , job changes, moves, just to name a few. In cases involving a dog  exhibiting behavior creating a public 
safety matter, the dangerous dog statute, which went through a significant overhaul before this committee in 
2017-2018 , provides an appropriate vehicle to address such concerns . 
 
It is important for rules to provide necessary parameters while also remaining  flexible enough to allow for the 
various types of organizations and numerous factors at play depending on a particular situation.  
 
Lastly, the Animal Welfare Advisory Co uncil (AWAC) has once again been meeting regularly and offers an 
avenue for the consid eration of additional rule changes. I would encourage the proponents of LD 157 to bring 
their concerns to AWAC’s attention during the public comment period of one of their upcoming meetings  
which can been attended virtually .  
 
Thank you for your considerat ion and opportunity to submit testimony  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Katie Lisnik  
 
Katie Lisnik 
Secretary  
Maine Federation of Humane Societies  
info@mefed.org  
 
