TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  L.D. 157 
"Resolve  to Improve Standards for Animal Rescue Entities ” 
Committee On Agricultur e, Conservation and Forestry  
February 8, 202 3 
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony neither for n or against  to L.D. 157 "Resolve to Improve Standards for Animal 
Rescue Entities .”   
 
As someone who operated a dog rescue in Maine for over a decade, I know firsthand  that an organization working to house 
and care for live animals  can easily t ake on too much o r become overwhelmed .  This is true not only for dog rescue and 
shelter ent ities, but also for breeding kennels, boarding kennels, and  sporting dog kennels.  Standards  of care have to be in  
place for all animal -specific operations to ensure animals receive the proper care .  From my own experience  in rescue, I 
also know that the state or municipality has the ability to limit the number  of animals under a shelter or kennel license based 
on the space, shelter and other factors present  at the time of the required inspection for licensing and  renewal.  
 
STAFF -TO-ANIMAL RATIOS  - Requiring a s taff-to-animal ratio  is a good concept for licensed shelters and kennels that  
house  animals in one location.  However, i t is also important to note that many of the private rescues in the state use foster 
homes to house dogs and cats to be placed for adoption.  This means that the animals are not living in one location /at a 
central kennel  where a caretaker -animal ratio could be implemented , but stay in various volunteer private homes  around the 
state  until adopted .  
 
RETURNS OF ADOPTED / SOLD ANIMALS  - Caution is suggested when considering  regulations  that impact animal s 
adopted out by a shelter or sold by a breeding kennel, that are returned multiple  times.   Animals are returned frequent ly for 
many reasons that have nothing to do with the animal itself …someone passes  away, someone moves, someone has 
allergies  or has to work too many hours.  Some of these return risk factors can be mitigated through careful placement 
screening, and post adoption / sale follow -up, but not all.  Additionally, Maine has some  of the most advanced dangerou s 
dog regulations  that would be applicable i n the instance  that a dog is returned due to  aggressive  behavior . 
 
CAPACITY FOR CARE RULES  - In 2022, the Animal Welfare Program under went rule making resulting the addition of  
Capacity  for Care standards for all shelters and kennels that are licensed by the state.   I believe these new rules may 
address some of concerns that the proposed resolve wishes to solve.  
 
 However , I would like to take this opportunity to suggest  that the new  Capacity for Care rules be extende d to the 
municipal ly licensed  kennels  (§3923 -C) in addition to state licensed kennels .   I feel these kennels fall th rough the cra cks 
in some cases , leading to costly animal neglect and  cruelty cases down the road.   Although a municipal  kennel license only 
covers 10 dogs, there is no limit on the number of  licenses one person can hold.   
 
For example, there is a n individual who l ives in / rents a converted shed in Somerville , Maine.  The shed has no electricity or 
running water.  The resident originally had a few dogs on site  as well as a rabbit hutch.   Over the last year and a half, the 
individual has acquired  approximately 40 dogs  at last check  - all chained outsi de.  She originally  received  one municipal 
kennel  license for the location but  has since been issued three additional  kennel licenses for th e same loc ation  to cover the 
ever-increasing  number  of dogs.  She states that the dogs are sled dogs and /or livestock guard ian dog s.  The only livestock 
on site are rabbits in the  outdoor hutch .  Her neighbors indicate that they have never seen the d ogs used for sledding  and 
there is no t a vehicle that could hold a sled dog team on site .   
 
Last year , one of  the dogs suffered from Pyometra, which  is deadly if untreated and  require s emergency  surgery.  The dog 
caretaker did not have the funds for the surgery.  This highlights a  probabl e issue with capacity for care at this location.  
 
 If the Capacity for Care rules were applied to municipal kennel licenses as well as state issued kennel licenses, it would 
2 | LD 1311  Testimony ( S. Richer)  
 likely  help to avoid animal su ffering and costly investigations and seizures.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
 
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 157
CORRECTED COMMENTS - Thank you!
