Michael F Mascia
Sweden
LD 1317
RE: Letter to HHS Committee In Support of LD 1317
Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you, Senator Bennett.
Gratitude
I thank all of you for the work you do and for taking the time to consider this most 
important health legislation.  
Thank you for taking the time to consider my support of this legislation.  
“First, do no harm”, “Do good” & “Do the right thing, always”?
Obligation, Oath and Altruistic Egoism?
AND
Mutually Beneficial Cooperative Action?
Who am I and why do I support this action?
I am honored and privileged to be a physician, scientist, healer, father and grandfather
who has lived in Maine since 1975.  I am honored and privileged to have served The 
People (in Maine, FL, Louisiana, Maryland, NY, WV, PA the Caribbean and the 
world) by saving lives, treating the sick, promoting health, preventing disease and by 
delivering and helping people get best health, best health care, best self care and best 
medical care for more than 50 years.  My life and my medical career has been 
dedicated to helping our people ... ourselves and each other ... by delivering full 
spectrum, integrated health and medical solutions since 1975.  By helping others,  I 
help myself and ourselves.  I am grateful for my health and for my ability to continue 
to help myself and others achieve best health, best health care, best self care and best 
medical care.  That is who I am and what I do, and I am grateful for the opportunity to
testify and for my ability to testify in favor of LD 1317; legislation to “Establish the 
Commission to Promote the Integration of Human Health and Environmental Health”.
Working For The American Business of Medicine AKA Big Medicine, VS Working 
With and For The People - Patients?
I choose to work with and for People - Patients.  In fact, Since January 2020, I no 
longer work for “Big Medicine” in any capacity.  This is true for many reasons.  The 
bottom line is this: the profit motive and many perverse incentives are driving the 
Business of Medicine.  In other words, mission drifting and shifting away from best 
care and toward best profit is the rule and these factors now make it impossible for me
to deliver BEST patient care with and for the people - patients inside hospitals, 
intensive care units and operating rooms that belong to Big / Corporate Medicine.  
Said another way, in the context of the current, profit driven Business of Medicine the
pressure to increase revenue and production, and to cut corners on quality is excessive
and makes it extremely difficult to deliver Best Medical Care with and for the patient.
In essence, best patient care and best medicine can not be done inside walls of The US
Business of Medicine.  Nevertheless,  I continue my health and medical work with 
and for myself and my people “for the love of it” ... not for money.  Yes, healing 
others ... delivering elegant health care and elegant medical care is ... indeed ... joyful.
That joyful, mutually beneficial sort of patient-physician relationship is ... a work of 
art.  That relationship, has nothing to do with money and everything to do with joy 
and love.
No Money In Health Care
In fact, there is no money in health care.  The money is in sick care ... factory like ... 
code driven ... money driven ... production driven ... robotic “care”.  That ... the 
money and profit driven sick care system and money/profit blindness ... is a large part
of the “wicked problem of health care” in the US and across the globe.  
My Life and My Work?
If you want my CV, resume and/or credentials let me know via 
mfmascia@gmail.com, or via text @ 315-491-3634.)
This Legislation?
Common Sense & Common Ground Solutions for Common Good: The Health of The
People
Dirigo: To Lead
Lead who, what, when, where, why and how?
“Start at the end, and go to the beginning.”
How to lead to better human <> environmental health?
Why do we need this legislation and the commission?
Is anything more important and valuable than the health of our people and to lead our 
people to best health?  
No!
It is important to “Establish the Commission to Promote the Integration of Human 
Health and Environmental Health” that will “conduct a comprehensive review of the 
overall health of the State’s population, healthcare access and delivery systems in the 
State and environmental health in the state and the interrelation of those public health 
areas and develop recommendations to achieve health equity in the State through an 
integrated health care approach” for many reasons, which I will outline below.  My 
outline is neither comprehensive, nor presented in priority order.  
That is the work of the commission.
Can This Work Be Done?
Will this work be difficult? Yes.  
Can it be done?  Yes.  
Is it affordable, safe and cost effective?  
Yes.  
Health promotion is much less expensive and much more beneficial than limiting our 
sights on prevention and/or treatment of disease, right?
If properly designed and implemented this commission will use technology to
•Engage the commission and the general public in a long term relationship that will 
-monitor, 
-promote, 
-preserve and 
-protect 
human and environmental HEALTH (emphasis on positive health) through mutually 
beneficial 
–learning, 
–teaching, 
-training and 
–triage re health, health care, medicine, medical care and science,
And will
•Display Findings AND Results RE Human<>Environmental Health & Health Care 
Assessments, with Data & Dynamic Maps
Health Behavior, Status and Environment Monitoring & Displays?
Real time displays (preferably real time) of our human & environmental health status 
and behavior ... diet, lifestyle and health care and self care and medical care ... status 
and results will be highly educational for all.  Participation in this “research” project 
(which should be open to all citizens of the state of Maine) should be voluntary.  
Participants will lead the way to helping develop and achieve best health<>best health
practices re individual health, collective health, environmental health health care and 
medical care.  By continuing the process of engaging our people and monitoring and 
displaying our results we can continue to build better and best human health & 
environmental practices in what is a changing world.  Health, medical, science and 
health care literacy will improve as will the health of the people and the health of the 
environment.
Not sure of the benefit and results?  
First run a pilot project with a small number of volunteers. 
(I will be happy to be the first experimental subject to sign up.)
Some Of the Many Reasons Why This Commission is Necessary?
•The Health of The People AKA Human Health is in decline: Note increasing 
incidence and prevalence of chronic diseases (including, but not limited to obesity, 
diabetes, hypertension, heart and blood vessel disease and other “Diseases of 
Civilization”) 
•Environmental Health is in decline
•Climate Change <> Constant Environmental/Biosphere Change <> Change Disease 
Risks and Patterns<>Increasing/Changing  Risk of Emerging Human & Wild Animal 
& Domestic Animal Infections
•Increased Emerging Infections at the Human <> Wild Intersection (eg, AIDS, Ebola, 
Lyme disease in Maine, and COVID 19 Pandemic)
•Health Care is neither readily accessible nor affordable (I can’t find it and get it, and 
I have been doing this for more than 50 years)
•Medical Care is neither readily accessible nor affordable (Ask me about my hernia 
repair that was done about 1 year ago via MMC)
•The Cost of US Medical Care is Increasing (and the billing and charges are 
outrageous)
•The Quality of US Medical Care is Decreasing (Outcomes are worse, NB Increased 
Hospital Morbidity and Mortality) (My surgical and anesthetic care was fine.  
Informed consent?  OK ... good, but I had to be persistent and I know the system.  The
Charges and Billing shenanigans are outrageous.  I am a guy who has done billing for 
FP, Anesthesiology and Critical Care systems for decades and the current business 
practices, charges and billing systems are OPAQUE, NOT RATIONAL, not 
reasonable and not acceptable. )
•US Life Expectancy is decreasing (this is common knowledge)
•US Life Expectancy is the LOWEST of all high income countries (common 
knowledge)
•Human Diet and Lifestyle changes can promote, preserve, protect human health and 
environmental health. (Note “The China Study” by Drs. Campbell and Campbell a 
father and son PhD/MD team.  Can we create The parallel “Maine Study”?  I think so.
•Human Diet and Lifestyle changes can stop and/or reverse certain chronic diseases 
and diseases of civilization. (Many references are available)
•Irrational Human development and attendant activities (especially factory farming of 
animals and their byproducts for human use / consumption) is damaging and 
destroying the environment
•The Value of Maine, as a sensible and healthy place to live and visit is threatened 
and/or decreasing as the human population increases and the wild places decline, 
degrade and disappear 
What have I left out?  So many things for consideration.
One Big Question To Be Answered?
How do we achieve proper development<>conservation balance to achieve and 
sustain best human<>environmental health for the short and the long haul?
In my view, that’s the most beautiful question we can ask.  
Why?  
Inside the big question of how to achieve and sustain best human - environmental 
health?
So many unanswered questions.
Here are a few that pop into my mind.
 
What should I eat?
How should I live?
What plants and animals should I grow?
How many trees should I cut down?
How many deer should I harvest in my back yard?
Should I catch and eat the wild fish in my back yard?
Should I grow and eat wild, native plants and animals?
Keep it Real, Wild and Alive
The answer(s) is(are) dynamic and poetic and alive. Participating in that process of 
lively health questioning, researching and studying can help us get engaged, learn, 
teach and train ourselves and each other ... and that alone will keep us and our 
children and our grandchildren going and lively and heading in a positive and healthy 
direction for many years, and decades decades.  
Why?  
The answer ... achieving best human <> best environmental health ...  is a constantly 
changing target and this work of ours ... is a beautiful and dynamic work of art as is 
the best of what is each patient - physician relationship.  Who am I to doubt these 
words of Leonardo daVinci: “Art is never finished, only abandoned”
Maine: A Sensible and Rational State
In 1975, I chose to come to Bridgton, ME to work and I chose to live in Sweden, ME, 
in 1976.  Why? For my health and for the health of my family and for the health of 
my patients.  My previous, 4 years in New Orleans, LA and 3 years in Miami, FL 
made it clear that wild, healthy Florida was dying and under threat.  Wild and 
healthy-Florida ... the Florida wild things that I loved, was/were dead and dying due 
to irrational, rapid and destructive development.  As anticipated, the results are fatal.  
The latest  manatee kill in The Indian River Lagoon demonstrates the catastrophe of 
considering the health of our environment and our wildlife as an afterthought.  
Clearly, “too little and too late” does not work in environmental health.  Who is to die
next?
So, yes, I came to Maine in 1975, because it was sensible, healthy, wild and relatively
unpopulated state.  Still is, as best I can tell.  Yes, I wanted it that way ... wild ... and 
did not have any intentions of attempting to change ME wildness into the NY City 
suburbs that I grew up in. Said another way, I had no intentions of following, or 
helping others to follow in the destructive “development” footsteps we see in FL, 
Massachusetts, NY, NJ, PA and other US states and other nations from which our 
visitors come.  
Maine Makes Sense
Over the years, good sense, cooperation, sensibility and working with Maine State 
officials has paid off in Health Dividends for ALL.  Our joint efforts to improve 
patient care, promote good parenting & prevent child abuse (The Child Development 
Project, circa 1985) and protect The People of Maine from nuclear contamination 
(Dump The Nuclear Dump Project, circa 1986) are notable examples.  Now, due to 
human health and environmental health threats and degradation of health care and 
medical care, it is time for a more concerted and sustained effort to preserve, protect 
and promote the health of the people and the health of the environment in Maine ... to 
get ahead of the and to diminish The “sick care” curve and wave that we currently 
live in.  With a concerted effort, this can be done.
There is no doubt that the value of Maine is in ... the treasure in Maine is in We The 
People, the natural beauty, the wild and our wildlife ... in our health the health of our 
wild lands and the health of our wildlife.  Let’s keep it that way ... wild and healthy.
Dirigo
Thanks to all of you for helping us to work together to lead the way, to keep The 
People of Maine, the State of Maine and the Wildlife of Maine healthy, beautiful, 
peaceful, safe and ... appropriately wild.  We have the natural resources and we have 
the brainpower to get the job done.  Together, we can help each other and our 
environment live long, healthy and happy lives at home ... in The State of Maine.
Perhaps we can lead the nation to solving what is the “wicked global problem of 
health care”?
Thank you for your consideration.
Let’s do it!
Dr. Mike
Michael F. Mascia, MD, MPH @IHS ip
Join us at Veritas Health Care  
Help Build Better Health Care
www.VeritasHC.org
mfmascia@VeritasHC.org
mfmascia@gmail.com
207-400-9179
315-491-3634
"Life without love is no life at all."
Leonardo da Vinci
PS. Selected References Will Be Submitted At Your Request and/or Under Separate 
Cover
