 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 18, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health  and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1317 - Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Promote the Integration of Human 
Health and Environmental Health  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Comm ittee on Health and 
Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1317, Resolve, to Establish the Commission to 
Promote the Integration of Human Health and Environmental Health, and the potential impact of 
the proposed legislation , if enacted. While this approach to public health work  is important, t he 
Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Ma ine CDC)  and the Department of Health 
and Human Services is opposed to this proposal  given existing work .  
 
LD 1317 directs the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to establish a Commission to 
Promote the Integration of Human Health and Environmental Health, which is di rected to 
conduct a comprehensive review of the overall health of the State's population, healthcare  access 
and delivery systems in the State and environmental health in the State and the interrelation of 
those public health areas and develop recommendatio ns to achieve health equity in the State 
through an integrated health care approach. If enacted, t he Commission members hip is to include 
representatives of a variety of industries and recreational groups that spend time outdoors, 
including loggers, manufacturers, hunters , conservationists, small farmers, and small private 
landowners, as well as a representative of the medical profession and appropriate staff of the 
Department  of Health and Human Services . This resolve requires t he Commissioner to sub mit to 
the committee , by December 6, 2023 , a report based on the commission's review.   
 
The Maine CDC  and DHHS  are supportive of the goal of improving the integration of human 
and environmental health and agrees that efforts to improv e this integration  should be leveraged 
to also improve  health equity across  the State.  However, it is not clear what problem or problems  
this legislation is intended to address.  Understanding the specific environmental, health, and/or 
equity concerns that led to the drafting of this bill will help the Department to provide a more 
informed assessment of the need for this bill  and determine the bill’s likely impact on existing 
work  and programs . 
 
This work is already happening, and statute and Executive Branch structure already supports this 
integration . Current statute already provides for the creation and support of an Environment al 
 
 Health Program within Maine CDC ( 22 MRS § 1692). The statute requires that this program 
“shall be staffed with individuals with training and  experience in environmental medicine, 
epidemiology, toxicology, statistics and related fields,” and that as part  of its regular operations , 
the Program is to  1) Develop indicators of health problems in the State, monitor the health status 
of the people of the State and establish and maintain the necessary data banks for broad 
surveillance of human health and disease  in Maine ; 2) Identify significant health problems  in the 
State, including those which may be related to environmental factors ; 3) Conduct and contract 
for investigations as necessary to determine whether particular problems are related to 
environmental fa ctors; 4) Advise the Commissioner of Health and Human Services, as well as 
other state agencies and boards, such as the Departments of Conservation, Environmental 
Protection, and Agriculture, Food, and Rural Resources, regarding th e potential health 
implications of their actions, the nature and extent of identified problems and the steps which can 
be taken to address them; and 5) Provide the public with information, and advise them as to 
preventive and corrective actions in the area  of environmental health.  
 
In practice, th e intent of th is statutory mandate is carried out by the Environmental and 
Occupational Health Program (EOHP), within the Maine CDC’s Division of Environmental and 
Community Health. The EOHP include s a staff of to xicologists, epidemiologists, environmental 
health scientists, public hea lth physicians and nurses, and health communications specialists , 
supported mostly by federal grant funding from U.S. CDC  along with modest support from the 
General Fund . The work of the EOHP includes  develop ing, publishing, and monitoring  of 
indicators of environmental factors that may affect health, and of health issues that may be 
related to environmental factors, through the Maine Tracking Network 
(https://data.mainepublichealth.gov/ ), an online, public -facing data portal . This  data portal allows 
Maine CDC, partners , data users, and the general public to conduct  monitoring and surveillance 
of environmental health threats and associated disease .  
 
LD 1317 proposes to establish a Commission to conduct a comprehensive review of the overall 
health of the State’s population, healthcare access and delivery systems in t he State , and 
environmental health in the State , as well as the interrel ation of those public health areas , in 
order to develop recommendations to achieve health equity in the State through an integrated 
healthcare approach.  It should be noted that  part of  the EOHP ’s general operations includes 
preparing and publishing public health data that allow for a  review of those aspects of the overall 
health of the State’s population  that may  be associated with environmental factors or exposure s, 
as well as a review of environmental health in the State more broadly.  Additionally, other 
programs within Maine CDC, as well as other offices within the Department, collect and 
maintain dat a that mor e generally describe the overall health of the State’s population , access to 
healthcare, and health equity . In particular, the Maine Shared Community Health Needs 
Assessment (CHNA)  within Maine CDC  publishes the Maine Interactive Health Data dashboard 
(www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/phdata/MaineCHNA/maine -interactive -health -data.shtml ), which 
includes measures of health behavior, health status,  access to healthcare, healthcare quality, 
various conditions and diseases , and social determinants of health.  An assessment of the State’s 
overall health , healthcare access and delivery systems, and current health equity  status would 
certainly require input from CHN A program staff, as well as staff from othe r relevant programs 
within the Department which work to assess and respond to the State’s health and healthcare 
 
 needs , such as the Office of MaineCare Services, the Office of the Health Insurance 
Marketplace, and key representatives from the Commissioner’s Office .   
 
If this bill is passed , Maine CDC will need additional resources for staff time  or a contracted 
facilitator to support the work of the proposed Committee. The level of effort required will 
depend significantly on the scope of the Committee’s work  and on the level of involvement from 
other program staff within Maine CDC and the Department .  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

