6" .- 1-,.»- 
" \. 
ya! QI »~ =~ 
Richard A. Bennetti 
_ _- ,,~,'j | 3 State House Station 
it-,1»:-, Senator, District 18 . 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Support of LD 1317, "Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Promote the Integration of 
Human Health and Environmental Health" 
I8 April 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities 
in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to introduce LD 1317, “Resolve, to Establish 
the Commission to Promote the Integration of Human Health and Environmental Health.” 
This legislation was brought to me by my constituent, Dr. Michael Mascia of Sweden. After 
talking with Dr. Mascia, it was clear that we both share a passion for Maine’s environment, and 
the health of Maine people. The two are intricately intertwined, and therefore, should be 
discussed in conjunction with each other. 
Right now, these two issues are dealt with in silos, with the Department of Health and Human 
Services tasked with ensuring the health of Maine people, and the Department of Environmental 
Protection tasked with ensuring the health of Maine’s environment. It is time to think more 
collaboratively because human health is directly related to environmental sustainability and 
health. Conversation needs to be developed and ongoing. 
LD 1317 creates a Commission tasked with this very goal. Members of the commission will 
represent the interests of the logging industry, the manufacturing industry, a hunting 
organization, the outdoor recreation community, medical professionals, farmers, and land owners 
among others. I do think the bill needs to be amended to include a representative of the 
Department of Environmental Protection. 
There are many examples of how environmental health can negatively affect human health. 
Perhaps most prevalent today is Maine’s PFAS problem, yet there are others environmental 
factors like mercury and arsenic that negatively affect the health of Maine people. Pregnant 
women are encouraged to avoid certain ﬁsh because of the high levels of mercury found in many 
species and water contaminated with arsenic can cause cancer and skin lesions after long-term 
exposure. 
According to the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, “Environmental pollutants can cause health problems like 
respiratory diseases, heart disease, and some types of cancer. People with low incomes are more 
likely to live in polluted areas and have unsafe drinking water. And children and pregnant 
women are at higher risk of health problems related to pollution. ” 
I believe the work of this Commission is timely and necessary. Thank you. I would be happy to 
answer any questions. 
Far: (207) 287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * ii/Iessuge Service I-800--J23-690/) * Web Sire: /egi.\'/urure.maine.g0v senate
