State of Maine       STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION  Testimony of Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education  Against: L.D. 617  An Act to Foster Career and Technical Education in Maine Schools by Creating an Additional Pathway to Certify Industrial Arts Teachers  Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  Introduced by: Representative Carlow  Date: March 9, 2023  Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:  My name is Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education. I am here to speak Against L.D. 617 An Act to Foster Career and Technical Education in Maine Schools by Creating an Additional Pathway to Certify Industrial Arts Teachers.  Members of the Maine State Board of Education (SBE) and especially the Certification and Higher Education (C&HE) Committee had numerous discussions on Chapter 115 in recent years. The State Board, Department of Education (DOE), and Education and Cultural Affairs Committee went through the rulemaking process for Chapter 115 in 2019.  A Resolve on Chapter 115 was enacted on June 28, 2019; however, the DOE determined afterwards that the regulations contained a number of conflicts and requirements that were confusing to the field.  Subsequently, the State Board voted not to adopt the Resolve of Rule Chapter 115 at its November 13, 2019 meeting.  Previously approved proposed changes were withdrawn and the rule was referred back to the C&HE Committee.  This led to an agreement between the DOE and the SBE that a new version of Chapter 115 should be drafted through a more inclusive process using consensus-based rulemaking.  The SBE voted on March 11, 2020 to initiate the Chapter 115 review, utilizing consensus-based rulemaking and to reconvene the Professional Standards Board (PSB) to also provide input. The consensus-based group met from May to November 2020 and a review by the PSB resulted in their support of the recommendations of the consensus-based committee.  Their proposed changes went to the State Board’s C&HE Committee through Deputy Commissioner Dan Chuhta.  The C&HE Committee and DOE worked on revisions to Chapter 115 in frequent meetings from October 2020 to December 2021.  Their amendments to Rule Chapter 115 went to a public hearing on August 16, 2021 with a period of public comment from July 28 through 
September 15.  It then went to a targeted comment period from October 27 through November 29 to address three substantive changes.  I share a bit of the history that led to the amended Chapter 115 that went into law on June 10, 2022 to point out that the many individuals involved in getting us to the rule that has been in place for only nine months gave due diligence to the many changes.  There were many meetings and many individuals involved in the process. Changes were made to provide flexibility toward credentialing while seeking a well-qualified workforce.    The 700 endorsement for industrial arts/technology education was included in the pre-kindergarten through grade 12 teacher endorsement along with the physical education, dance, health, theater, business education, family and consumer science, and computer technology endorsements as it was determined that it fit in well with that group of endorsements.  There are two endorsement eligibility pathways for all the endorsements listed, and there is a provision for obtaining a conditional certificate for all the endorsements. Creating a third pathway was not, and is not, deemed necessary for any of the eight endorsements listed above for Section 1.5 of Rule Chapter 115.  It has been mentioned that the 700 endorsement for industrial arts/technology education  endorsement should be moved to Section 3: Teachers and Educational Specialists: Career and  Technical Education (CTE) Certificates and Endorsements section of Rule Chapter 115. The  pathways to certification and endorsements in the CTE section are not less demanding than the  pathways in Section 1.5    Taking into account that there was a comprehensive review and majority support for the amendments to Rule Chapter 115 and that it has been only nine months since the implementation of the changes, it is premature to be adding a third pathway to the most recent 700 industrial arts/technology education endorsement to include an apprenticeship, 2-year degree or certificate, paid applied employment or teaching in the endorsement area, and completion of a minimum number of hours of experience learning the trade or craft The State Board of Education supports industrial arts education, but we are Against L.D. 617 An Act to Foster Career and Technical Education in Maine Schools by Creating an Additional Pathway to Certify Industrial Arts Teachers. Thank you for this opportunity to comment. I would be happy to answer any questions the Committee may have.  The State Board will be available for work sessions on this bill. 
