MAINE 
CHA1¥lEE.R 
( (§i\/lit/ZIERQE 
___,_{-E ‘? _ — :»:_._<~..<; “1-:- —,;..¢;;L';;?""i;a£<';¢2L= 
The voice Q/' Maine bzzszrzvss 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of 
L.D. 617 An Act to Foster Career and Technical Education in Maine Schools by 
Creating an Additional Pathway to Certify Industrial Arts Teachers 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner andI 
represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my 
testimony in support of expanding the educator workforce in career and technical 
education programs by creating an additional pathway to certifying industrial arts 
teachers. 
The business community is pleased to see the growth in career and technical 
education programs over the past several years. The expansion of these programs 
has done well to help the state reach certificate of value and education attainment 
goals. As a member of the MaineSpark Coalition, the Maine State Chamber values 
efforts to expand the size and skills of Maine’s future workforce. Reducing 
barriers to this type of educational experience is a top priority for the Chamber and 
its business community members. As career and technical education programs 
grow more and more Maine students are graduating high school with career 
readiness and value to bring to the workforce. With this growth multiple barriers 
and areas of friction have become apparent. One area of friction is a lack of 
available staff for CTE centers. The Maine State Chamber supports the expansion 
of experiential and career and technical learning. This bill works toward that goal 
by creating additional pathways for certification in CTE programming. This bill 
not only helps to ease staffing shortages at CTE centers, but it also helps eliminate 
concerns around whether or not a person with technical knowledge can bea 
successful educator. As an endorsement on an existing teaching certificate we can 
be assured that the individual obtaining the endorsement has already proven their 
competency as an educator.
While the State Chamber recognizes teacher shortages, and supports efforts 
to ease such shortages, the Chamber also understands that there is a need to ensure 
that quality professionals are entering our schools. This bill address both with an 
appropriate balance. I ask that you give LD6l7 your support so that we can 
continue to ease current workforce challenges and serve the growing number of 
students who Wish to have career and technical education as part of their high 
school experience. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.
