Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 354 - An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding the Use of Engineers on Public Works Projects over 
$100,000
February 14, 2023
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in support of LD 354, An Act to 
Amend the Laws Regarding the Use of Engineers on Public Works Projects over $100,000, on behalf of 
the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the 
Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 
35 Senate districts.
Municipalities of all sizes must undertake public works projects in their communities at varying 
frequency. The current costs of construction of even small road projects now exceed the project threshold 
in current statute requiring the use of an engineer, sometimes even in the planning stage. For instance, the 
University of Maine study on culverts to promote fish passage indicate that a concrete box culvert for a 
small stream crossing of 10 feet costs roughly $164,000, but is standardized, precast to appropriate 
structural standards by the manufacturer and simply requires placement in the same manner as a smaller 
round culvert replacement which costs roughly $37,000 but has a much short life span. The cost and 
maintenance needs over time make the precast concrete version more economical, however the trigger for 
an engineer to review the project based on the cost of the culvert would significantly add to the cost of a 
long-term solution, that would also improve fish passage, and not add any clear value to the project.  
Additionally, due to their infrequency of need, smaller communities struggle to find licensed 
engineers who are often not as interested in a small common projects due demand for larger and more 
complex projects in bigger communities. Officials believe that raising the project threshold level for 
involvement of a licensed engineer to $250,000 would better reflect current costs for projects that should 
not need an engineer like the repair of dirt roads, and replacement of driveway and watershed culverts, 
and increase the use of licensed engineers for larger more specialized projects where they can add value. 
Municipal officials thank you for considering this important change to assist communities better 
balance infrastructure investment and ask that you consider a link to CPI or some other inflationary 
measure to an increased threshold as well to allow the level to stay in step with construction costs for the 
future.
