 
AMERICAN COUNCIL OF ENGINEERING COMPANIES  
of Maine  
 
451  WEBBS MILLS ROAD , RAYMOND , ME  04071    ♦   PHONE 207-557-0939    ♦   WWW .ACECMAINE .COM   
Testimony of Theresa Patten  
to the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
 
In Support with Amendment 
 
L.D. 354, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding the Use of Engineers on Public Works 
Projects over $100,000  
 
February 14, 2023 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint  Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government:  My name is Theresa Patten. I am professional engineer with Cred ere Associates in Westbrook, 
Maine, and the Chair of the Government Affairs Committee for th e American Council of 
Engineering Companies of Maine (ACEC-ME). The membership of ACE C-ME includes more 
than 60 consulting engineering firms from all engineering disci plines located throughout the 
State. 
 
I am testifying today in support of L.D. 354, An Act to Amend t he Laws Regarding the Use of 
Engineers on Public Works Projects over $100,000, and offering an amendment. LD 354 
proposes to increase the threshold from $100,000 to $250,000 fo r requiring the services of a 
licensed professional engineer (PE) on Public Works projects.  ACEC-ME asks the Committee to 
consider removing this dollar reference entirely, because it is  misleading and distracts the focus 
from the need to protect public safety and welfare.  There are projects under the cost threshold that require the in volvement of a professional 
engineer.  This includes renovation of a public building that h as a structural change; a 
stormwater system that requires hydraulic or structural analysi s; or wastewater process change 
that requires capacity calculations.  On the other hand, there many projects that would cost above 
the threshold that would not require engineering analysis, such  as aesthetic improvements or 
maintaining surface pavement. There are many other examples, bu t  t h e  g o a l  i s  t o  g e t  a  P E  
involved when public safety and welfare are a consideration reg ardless of the project cost. 
  The current statute is written with double negatives and exceptions, which is confusing to 
interpret. Therefore, we suggest that the law be clarified to r emove the dollar amount, and 
instead focus on requiring a PE when safeguarding of life, heal th, or property is a concern.  
 Accordingly, we offer the following amendment:  
 
 32 MRSA §1254. Public works 
  
1. Use of licensed professional engineer not required.  Except as provided in subsection 2 , Any 
department of this State or any of its political subdivisions o r any county, city, town, township, 
or plantation may engage engaged in the construction of any pub lic work shall procureing the 
services of a licensed professional engineer when there is a as  long as the contemplated 
expenditure for the completed project does not exceed $100,000 and the work, both as 
performed and as completed, does not create an undue risk to pu blic safety or welfare.   
  
2.  Exception.  Any department of this State or any of its poli tical subdivisions or any county, city, 
town, township, or plantation may require the services of a lic ensed professional engineer for any public 
works project if the services of the professional engineer are required to comply with any provision of law 
or rule.   
  
With this amendment, the state agencies and municipal public wo rks departments can focus their 
review on whether a public works project will present a risk to  public safety and welfare. The 
state and engineering stakeholders could work together to provi de some guidance on this 
analysis.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to a nswer any questions you may 
have.          
