131st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
. 
Se 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
0 f M aing Office (207) 287-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing 
LD 1312, An Act to Limit the Immunity of Charitable Organizations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly represent Senate District 31, 
which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today I am pleased to introduce LD 
1312, “An Act to Limit the Immunity of Charitable Organizations. ” 
Charitable immunity, for those of you not familiar with the term, is a legal doctrine that holds 
that a charitable organization is not liable under tort law for negligence of its employees. It 
originated in English common law, and has been recognized in Maine through our courts. 
Despite invitations from the Law Court to address the doctrine legislatively, the only current 
statute concerning charitable immunity can be found in 14 MRS section 158, enacted in 1965 
(perhaps in reaction to the Court’s decision in Mendall v. Pleasant Mountain Ski Development, 
Inc 159 Me. 285, 191 A.2d 633 (1963), in which the Court upheld the doctrine of charitable 
immunity, not because of any sound policy reasons behind the doctrine, but because charitable 
organizations had relied upon it for so long that the abrogation of the doctrine would be too far- 
reaching and better left to the Legislature.) 14 MRS section 158 limits the doctrine by providing 
that a charitable organization waives any immunity to the extent it has insurance to cover the 
liability. 
The charitable immunity doctrine has also been addressed in Maine case law, being ﬁrst adopted 
by the Court in 1910, and most recently in the case ofPicher v. Roman Catholic Bishop, 2009 
ME 67, which I believe you have all been sent the link for or Sam has provided you copies. This 
case further limited the doctrine of charitable immunity by holding that it does not apply to 
intentional torts. The Picker decision also lays out an extensive examination of the state of 
charitable immunity across the country at the time of the decision (2009), ﬁnding that it is “a 
doctrine in general disrepute. ” Id at {I 13. I believe a speaker behind me Will give the Committee 
updated information on the state of the doctrine in the Country today.
1
LD 1312 before you would codify the Picher holding that the doctrine of charitable immunity 
does not apply to intentional torts, but would also add the additional exception that the defense 
would not be available in cases of sexual abuse of a minor. 
The amendment, which the committee and interested parties should have received on Friday, 
clariﬁes that this statutory change would be retroactive, in keeping with the legislative intent in 
14 MRS 752-C to eliminate any statute of limitations, or other impediments, for cases alleging 
sexual abuse of a minor. The Committee will hear in more detail form those coming after me the 
policy reasons as to why exempting child sexual abuse cases, and speciﬁcally doing it 
retroactively, is a sound policy decision for the Legislature to make, as the Law Court has invited 
us to do. 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions. 
(>19--\ Donna Bailey 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
2
Proposed Amendment to LD 1312 
(oﬂered by Sen. Bailey) 
Committee: IUD 
Date: 4-24-23 
LD 1291 - An Act to Limit the Immunity of Charitable Organizations 
Amend the bill by making the changes below: 
Sec. 1. 14 MRSA §158, as enacted by PL 1965, c. 513, §28, is amended to read: 
§158. Damages for tortious conduct of charitable corporations organizations 
A charitable organization shal-l—be is considered to have waived its immunity from liability 
for negligence or any other tort during the period a policy of insurance is effective covering 
the liability of the charitable organization for negligence or any other tort. Each policy issued 
to a charitable organization shall mtg contain a provision to the effect that the insurer shallbe 
ig estopped from asserting, as a defense to any claim covered by said th _e policy, that sueh _tl_1_e 
organization is immune from liability on the ground that it is a charitable organization. Qche 
Except as provided in section 158-C. subsection 2. the amount of damages in any such case 
shall Q1 not exceed the limits of coverage speciﬁed in the policy, and the courts shall abate 
any verdict in any such action to the extent that it exceeds the limits. 
Sec. 2. 14 MRSA §158-C is enacted to read: 
§158-C. Limitation on immunity of charitable organizations 
1. Deﬁnitions. As used in this section. unless the context otherwise indicates. the 
following terms have the following meanings. 
A. "Charitable organization" has the same meaning as in section 158-B. subsection 3. 
B. "Minor" means an individual who has not attained 18 years of age.- 
C. "Sexual assault or sexual exploitation of a minor" means any crime described in Title 
17-A. chapters 11 or 12 against a minor. 
2. Limitation on immunity of charitable organization. A charitable organization is 
considered to have waived its immunity from liability for negligence or any other tort during 
the period a policy of insurance is effective covering the liability of the charitable organization 
for neghgence or any other tort. Each policy issued to a charitable organization must contain a 
provision to the effect that the insurer is estopped from asserting, as a defense to any claim 
covered by the policy, that the organization is immune from liability on the ground that it isa 
charitable organization. The amount of damages in any such case may not exceed the limits of 
coverage speciﬁed in the policy. and the court shall abate any verdict in the case to the extent 
that it exceeds the limits. except that nothing in this chapter limits the amount of damages 
based on the amount of insurance coverage in cases of sexual assault of a minor or sexual 
exploitation of a minor. 
3. Immunity not available for sexual assault of a minor and sexual exploitation ofa 
minor. Notwithstanding subsection 2. a charitable organization is not immune from liability 
for any tort alleging negligent hiring. supervision or retention of an employee. agent or servant 
that arises out of sexual assault of a minor or sexual exploitation of a minor.
1
4. Immunity not available for intentional torts. A charitable organization is not immune 
from liabilitv for intentional torts. 
See 3- Annlisation- , 
laétbi 
SUMMARY 
This amendment clariﬁes that the provisions of this Act apply to any civil action or 
proceeding that is pending as of the effective date of this Act, any tortuous conduct that occurred 
prior to the effective date of this Act, and any civil action or proceeding that occurs on or after 
the effective date of this Act.
2
