 
 CHILDUSA.org  |  3508 Market Street, Suite 202  |  Philadelphia, PA 19104  |  info@childusa.org  CHILDUSAdvocacy.org  |  3508 Market Street, Suite 201  | Philadelphia, PA 19104  |  info@childusadvocacy.org 
 TO:   Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee  FROM:  Marci Hamilton, Founder & CEO, CHILD USA; Professor, University of Pennsylvania, and Kathryn Robb, Executive Director, CHILD USAdvocacy  RE:  S.P. 530   DATE:  April 22, 2023   Dear Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,    Thank you for allowing us to submit commentary in support of S.P. 530, and urging an amendment to allow it to apply retroactively.  S.P. 530 provides that charitable immunity is not a defense or a means to limit damages for sexual assault or exploitation of a minor. This legislation will bring institutional bad actors to light by permitting child sex abuse (“CSA”) survivors to light, but it must apply retroactively to allow maximum transparency and accountability to keep Maine’s children safe from harm.   By way of introduction, Professor Marci Hamilton is a First Amendment constitutional scholar at the University of Pennsylvania who has led the national movement to reform statutes of limitations to reflect the science of delayed disclosure of childhood sexual abuse and who founded CHILD USA, a national nonprofit think tank devoted to ending child abuse and neglect.  Kathryn Robb is the Executive Director of CHILD USAdvocacy, an advocacy organization dedicated to protecting children’s civil liberties and keeping children safe from abuse and neglect.  Kathryn is also an outspoken survivor of child sex abuse.    I. Maine Lags Behind the Majority of States that Repudiate Antiquated Charitable Immunity Protections for Dangerous Organizational Practices 

2   
www.childusa.org | www.childusadvocacy.org     Immunity from tort liability for charitable organizations arose as a “misapplication of previously established principles,”1 originating from dictum in an 1846 British case regarding the treatment of trust funds. The concept was overruled quickly, in 1866, but the Massachusetts Supreme Court had not gotten that memo when it adopted and misinterpreted the concept in an 1876 case.  Other states adopted the rule with varying parameters, but this antiquated protection for the harmful practices of problematic institutions has been widely repudiated across the country.2    
  74% of states do not use charitable immunity as a means to deny justice to CSA survivors and conceal predators and the practices that put children at risk. The few remaining states that have fallen behind the national trend toward child protection are catching up, as shown by the introduction of S.P. 530 by this legislature, and similar pending legislation in Massachusetts – Bill S. 916 which would remove the existing limitation on damages for CSA claims against a charitable organization. Maine has a history of protecting its kids and demanding transparency regarding institutional failures which place its kids at risk.  This legislature did children a great service in eliminating the civil SOL for CSA in 2000, demanding transparency and accountability for bad actors and unsafe practices.  In 2021, this legislature also enacted a permanent revival window for  1 Georgetown College v. Hughes, 130 F.2d 810, 815, 76 U.S.App.D.C. 123 (1942) 2 Grassman, John, The Doctrine of Charitable Immunity and its Impact on Medical Malpractice Litigation in the United States, 5 JCC HONORS JOURNAL 2 (2014) 

3   
www.childusa.org | www.childusadvocacy.org  previously expired claims in a heroic effort to help keep Maine kids safe. S.P. 530’s elimination of the arbitrary immunity granted to charitable organizations is in line with Maine’s penchant for protecting children but falls short unless it applies retroactively.    II. Immunity From Accountability for Charitable Organizations Endangers Children by Concealing Evidence of Dangerous Institutional Practices  Transparency is necessary to protect Maine’s children.  Problematic institutional practices place children at great risk of harm, and with a reduced ability to shed light on those practices, organizations are without sufficient motivation to closely examine their policies to determine which ones are worth maintaining, and which ought to be updated or abandoned, leaving children unsafe and underserved.  S.P. 530 offers these organizations a blanket of secrecy, ensuring that failures, errors in judgement, and bad acts will go unnoticed by the public.  Historically, a wall of ignorance and secrecy has been constructed around CSA.  Allowing organizations to continue to conceal policies that foster and encourage child sex abuse will lead to more prevalent and more severe abuse because the nature of those crimes is such that perpetrators become emboldened over time – increasing the frequency and severity of abuse.  It is in society’s best interest to publicly reveal both the identity of child abuse perpetrators and the systems that enabled them to harm children.  A lack of disclosure gives perpetrators and institutions wide latitude to suppress the truth to the detriment of children, parents, and the public.  Some predators abuse a high number of victims and continue abusing children well into their elderly years.  For example, one study found that 7% of offenders sampled committed offenses against 41 to 450 children, and the highest time between offense to conviction was 36 years.3    Removing immunity for sexual abuse and harmful practices helps protect Maine’s children by identifying problematic institutional policies and preventing such policies from encouraging perpetrators to abuse more children in Maine.     Concealing such abuse is as expensive as it is dangerous.  Child sexual abuse generates staggering costs that impact the nation’s health care, education, criminal justice, and welfare systems.  The estimated lifetime cost to society of child sexual abuse cases occurring in the US in 2015 is $9.3 billion, and the average cost of non-fatal per female victim was estimated at $282,734. Average cost estimates per victim include, in part, $14,357 in child medical costs, $9,882 in adult medical costs, $223,581 in lost productivity, $8,333 in child welfare costs, $2,434 in costs associated with crime, and $3,760 in special education costs. Costs associated with suicide deaths are estimated at $20,387 for female victims.4  It is unfair for the victims, their families, and Maine taxpayers to be the only ones who bear this burden; this bill levels the playing field by imposing liability on the ones who caused the abuse and alleviating the burdens on the victims and taxpayers.    When bad policies prevent the discovery of abusers and the systems that conceal them, child abusers are not identified, and they do not enter the sex offender registry thus leaving predators  3 Michelle Elliott et al., Child Sexual Abuse Prevention: What Offenders Tell Us, 19 CHILD ABUSE NEGL. 579 (1995). 4 Elizabeth J. Letourneau et al., The Economic Burden of Child Sexual Abuse in the United States, 79 CHILD ABUSE NEGL. 413 (2018). 
4   
www.childusa.org | www.childusadvocacy.org  free to access professional and volunteer positions that require close contact with children. When predators and institutions are exposed, particularly high-profile ones like Larry Nassar, Jeffrey Epstein, the Boy Scouts of America, and the Catholic Church, the media publish investigations and documentaries that enlighten the public about the insidious ways child molesters operate to sexually assault children and the institutional failures that enabled their abuse.5  By shedding light on the problem, parents and other guardians are better able to identify abusers and responsible institutions, while the public is empowered to recognize grooming and abusive behavior and pressure youth serving organizations to implement prevention policies to report abuse in real time.  Indeed, CSA publicity creates more social awareness to help keep kids safe, while also encouraging institutions to implement accountability and safe practices.   
  III. Conclusion  Once again, we commend your historical efforts to protect children, and implore you to continue this trend by enacting S.P. 530, with an amendment to ensure that it applies retroactively to reveal hidden predators and offer broad protection for Maine’s children.  Maine must begin to hold all institutions accountable for their problematic practices, and exposure via the justice system is essential in this regard.  For more information about the impacts of child sex abuse visit  childusa.org/child-sex-abuse or email info@childusa.org. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have questions regarding SOL reform or if we can be of assistance in any way on other child protection issues.   Sincerely,  5 E.g., Netflix’s Jeffrey Epstein: Filthy Rich; HBO’s At the Heart of Gold: Inside the USA Gymnastics Scandal. 

5   
www.childusa.org | www.childusadvocacy.org   Marci A. Hamilton, Esq. Founder & CEO CHILD USA 3508 Market Street, Suite 202 Philadelphia, PA 19104 mhamilton@childusa.org (215) 539-1906  Kathryn Robb, Esq. Executive Director CHILD USAdvocacy 3508 Market Street, Suite 201 Philadelphia, PA 19104 krobb@childusadvocacy.org (781) 856-7207 

