April 24, 2023 
Comments before Judiciary Committee 
LD 1312, SPO53O An Act to Limit the Immunity of Charitable Organizations... 
Madam Chairman & Mr. Chairman, committee members, 
I am Michael Sweatt, a resident of North Yarmouth, and a survivor of sexual abuse at Cheverus High School, at the hands 
of teacher and track coach, Charles Malia. It's an honor to be able to speak before you today and I thank you for this 
opportunity. l want to speak to you today about "barriers" and "justice." 
Speaking as a survivor I can tell you that too often child-victims face barriers to healing, and some barriers by a justice 
system which should be designed to protect them. 
The barriers start with stigma, blocking us from telling someone, anyone about our abuse. What does the abuse say 
about ME? How do I tell? How do I formulate the words? Who do I tell? 
The only person I told was my wife... until my 14-year-old son was to come face-to-face with my perpetrator, in the same 
situation as myself, as a freshman at Cheverus. 
Victims tell when we feel safe, sometimes when seeking justice or sometimes, as in my case, when someone we love 
becomes vulnerable to abuse. It became necessary for me, 25 years after my abuse, then as a 40-year-old-husband, 
father and son, to tell my parents. They both took the guilt of being unable to protect their son, to their graves and 
knowing justice eluded me. 
Other barriers for victims arise when legal and other ofﬁcials who represent our perpetrators don't believe us and 
dismiss our report. Cheverus' lawyer told me, almost verbatim... we interviewed Mr. Malia and he denies it. Besides, we 
have had no other reports against him. When I discovered another victim and spoke with Cheverus' attorney again, I was 
told, nearly verbatim, but these two cases are old. Apparently, statutes of limitation were on his mind. Cheverus' 
principal told me Charles Malia was a great teacher and a great coach! I had to educate him that sexual predators can't 
be great teachers and coaches if they prey on children. 
Barriers are now coming down as we all become more educated about sexual abuse and the long-term impact of silence, 
and equally important, as laws are changed. 
Maine has removed, thanks to heroic efforts and against powerful institutions, statues of limitations for criminal and civil 
child sexual abuse cases. Maine has moved to allow for retroactivity of civil cases, only to be challenged by the Catholic 
Church in Maine, a charitable organization with assets in excess of $140M and annual income reportedly of over $55M. 
Further, the same church has $29M in liquid assets, speciﬁcally shielded from access by child, sex abuse victims. 
Sexual abuse is prevalent regardless of economic, social, cultural, and sexual status or orientation. It touches Native- 
Americans, Irish-Americans, Franco-Americans, Italian-Americans, Acadian Americans, essentially all Americans. We'd be 
hard-pressed to ﬁnd anyone who doesn't know someone who has been sexually abused. 
Victims and survivors in Maine face a ﬁnal barrier to justice, that is the Charitable Immunity Defense. This defense only 
serves to favor institutions over thinking, breathing, and hurting human beings. Why should victims of abuse havea 
lower standing in the courts? Why should institutions which have beneﬁtted from legal protection and deference have 
the upper hand over victims? 
Please, during your deliberations, consider the barriers that victims face, show deference to them, and remove this ﬁnal 
barrier so that they can have their day in court AND achieve justice.

2 
concealment unduly narrowly. Reviewing the entry of a summary judgment 
de novo, Estate of Smith v. Cumberland Cnty., 2013 ME 13, 11 12, 60 A.3d 759, we 
affirm the judgment. 
[112] The only claim against the Diocese remaining after our remand is the 
intentional tort of fraudulent concealment; no claims sounding in negligence 
remain for adjudication. A claim of fraudulent concealment, like any claim of 
fraud, is subject to more rigorous pleading requirements not applied to common 
law negligence claims. See M.R. Civ. P. 9(b) (“[T]he circumstances constituting 
fraud or mistake shall be stated with particularity ”); Bean v. Cummings, 2008 ME 
18, 11 8, 939 A.2d 676. Additionally, the plaintiff ultimately must prove the 
elements of fraudulent concealment by clear and convincing evidence. See Barr v. 
Dyke, 2012 ME 108, 1111 16-17, 49 A.3d 1280. 
[113] Thus, to prevail on a claim for fraudulent concealment, a plaintiff must 
prove, by clear and convincing evidence, (1) a failure to disclose, (2) a material 
fact, (3) when a legal or equitable duty to disclose exists, (4) with the intention of 
inducing another to act or refrain from acting in reliance on the non-disclosure, and 
(5) the plaintiff in fact relied upon the non-disclosure to the plaintiffs detriment. 
Id. 11 16; Picher I, 2009 ME 67, 11 30, 974 A.2d 286. Given these elements, a claim 
of fraudulent concealment cannot be proved unless the aggrieved party produces 
clear and convincing evidence that the alleged tortfeasor had an obligation to
3 
disclose known information that would be material in preventing the detriment 
allegedly suffered by the aggrieved party. See Throckmartin v. Century 2] Top 
Realty, 226 P.3d 793, 809 (Wyo. 2010) (“[O]ne cannot be guilty of fraudulently or 
intentionally concealing or misrepresenting facts of which he is not aware”); see 
also Barﬁeld v. Hall Really, Inc., 232 P.3d 286, 292 (Colo. App. 2010) (requiring 
as an element of fraudulent concealment “the defendant ’s knowledge that the 
[material existing] fact is being concealed ”). 
[114] The summary judgment record before us does not include any 
evidence, direct or circumstantial, that the Diocese had knowledge, before or 
during the time when Picher was abused, that Melville was a sexual abuser of 
minors. The information of which the Diocese may have been aware, which 
disclosed no prior sexual abuse by Melville, is not the type of material information 
that triggers a duty to disclose. Nor are there facts in the record indicating that the 
Diocese had a special or ﬁduciary relationship with Picher, see Fortin v. Roman 
Catholic Bishop of Portland, 2005 ME 57, {HI 29, 32-35, 871 A.2d 1208, or that the 
Diocese was aware of Picher’s abuse while it was happening or soon after it 
happened, such that the Diocese would have a duty to reveal information to 
prevent additional abuse or to afterward communicate with Picher and offer or 
suggest that he seek assistance for issues arising from the abuse.
4 
[115] On this record, the Superior Court correctly concluded that Picher 
failed to set forth facts that could establish a breach of any duty to disclose a 
known material fact and, consequently, Picher did not meet his burden of 
establishing a prima facie case that the Diocese had fraudulently concealed 
material facts that, if known by Picher or his parents, would have prevented 
Picher’s injuries. See F laherly v. Muther, 2011 ME 32, 1] 38, 17 A.3d 640. 
[116] Picher also argues that the court abused its discretion by (1) permitting 
him access only to redacted, encoded Diocese records rather than to records 
containing the actual names of persons alleged to be victims of clergy sexual abuse 
and names of clergy accused of sexual misconduct, and (2) failing to rule on his 
motion for leave to depose a particular individual after the close of discovery. No 
abuse of discretion is demonstrated in the discovery rulings in this case. "See 
M.R. Civ. P. l6, 26(0); see also Selby v. Cumberland Cnty, 2002ME 80, 1] 12 
n.ll, 796 A.2d 678 (“Discovery orders. are generally reviewed for abuse of 
discretion. ”); Pattershall v. Jenness, 485 A.2d 980, 985 (Me. 1984) (“The trial 
court has Wide discretion over discovery matters. ”); see generally Nieves-Romero 
v. United States, 715 F.3d 375, 380-82 (lst Cir. 2013) (ﬁnding no abuse of 
discretion when the court granted the defendant ’s summary judgment motion 
before the expiration of the extended discovery period).
The entry is: 
Judgment affirmed. 
On the briefs: 
Sumner H. Lipman, Esq., and Benjamin J. Tucker, Esq., Lipman & Katz, 
P.A., Augusta, and Peter Bickerman, Esq., Readﬁeld, for appellant William 
J. Picher 
Gerald F. Petruccelli, Esq., and Bradford A. Pattershall, Esq., Petruccelli, 
Martin and Haddow, LLP, Portland, for appellee 
The Roman Catholic Bishop of Portland 
At oral argument: 
Peter Bickerman, Esq, for appellant William J. Picher 
Gerald F. Petruccelli, Esq., for appellee The Roman Catholic Bishop of 
Portland 
Kennebec County Superior Court docket number CV-2007-57 
FOR CLERK REFERENCE ONLY
