May 15, 2023  
S
enator Donna Bailey, Co- Chair  
Representative Anne Perry, Co- Chair  
HCIFS Committee  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333  
HDA  T
estimony  Opposing LD 1816/1829  
D
ear Chair Bailey, Chair Perry, and Honorable Members of the HCIFS Committee: 
T
he Healthcare Distribution Alliance (HDA) would like to thank you for the chance to share our  
respectful opposition to  LD 1816/1829, An Act Requiring Reference Based Pricing. HDA is the 
vital link between the nation’s pharmaceutical manufacturers and more than 180,000 pharmacies and other healthcare settings nationwide. An estimated 93% of US prescription drugs are handled by our 
members, who work around the clock to save the US Healthcare System billions annually through 
efficient management of drug supply chain logistics. In Maine , our members serve over 261  
customers ( hospitals, pharmacies, and more). 
Distributors are unlike any other supply chain participants – their core business does not involve 
manufacturing, marketing, prescribing or dispensing medicines, and they do not  set the 
Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC) list price of prescription drugs, influence prescribing 
patterns or determine patient -benefit design.   Rather, wholesale distributors are the logistics 
experts within the supply chain who ensure that drugs and other healthcare products are delivered in 
the most safe and efficient manner possible. E nsuring that the pharmaceutical supply chain remain s 
stable, resilient, and secure is a top priority of our members, and to that end we respectfully oppose 
LD 1816/1829  due to the following concerns: 
• LD
 1816/1829 seeks to implement a state -level policy mirroring Medicare’s Maximum 
Fair Price (MFP) at a time when the federal policy has not yet been fully determined or 
implemented.  Considering such state- level p olicies during a time in which the industry is 
already undergoing fundamental and undefined drug policy changes at the federal level  
would  have a severely damaging impact on the overall pharmaceutical supply chain.  For 
example, CMS is still undergoing rulemaking regarding how to effectuate the Inflation 
Reduction Act’s Market Fair Price, including establishing operational  models that protect  
efficiency, accuracy, and program integrity. The comment period for CMS’ recently released 
“Initial Memorandum on Implementation” is still open, and the wholesale distribution industry 
is actively working with CMS regarding the challenges  their initial guidance poses for  the 
supply chain and some data flow gaps it creates. Creati ng a patchwork of state policies and 
pricing metrics  for a variety of pharmaceutical products  at this time, when a myriad of issues 
are still being resolved in advance of the federal program roll out , would drastically increase 
overall costs in the supply chain and create unpredictability in the marketplace as a whole. 
HDA believes that states should take time to fully realize the impact of federal policy changes 
before seeking to add additional complications to the marketplace , in order to ensure  that Mai ne’s 
patients maintain timely access to essential medications . We strongly recommend that these 
measures not be advanced at this time.  
 
• We are additionally greatly concerned with language in Section 2  which misconstrues 
the roles of manufacturers and distributors , and would hold distributors responsible 
for manufacturer actions and responsibilities.   Stating that it would be a violation of a 
manufacturer or a distributor  to withdraw a drug due to MFP ra te limits, and that both 
manufacturers and distributors would face fines of $500,000 for violations, puts distributors 
at risk for being penalized for manufacturer actions. Manufacturers - not distributors - set drug 
list prices, or Wholesale Acquisition Cos t (WAC), so a distributor cannot “negotiate in good 
faith” as the measure states . Additionally, manufacturers - not distributors - bring drugs to 
market, so if a manufacturer withdrew a drug from the market to avoid setting the list price of 
that drug at the  MFP rate, a distributor cannot distribute it, and therefore should not face a 
$500,000 fine.  Finally,  while a manufacturer might face a fine for one product, distributors 
work with over 1,500 manufacturers, distributing 94% of all products, so could face 
exorbitant fees due to manufacturer actions.  
 
We respectfully request that distributors be struck from the following clauses of 
Section 2 : 
 
C. A manufacturer or distributor  of a referenced drug may not refuse to negotiate in good faith 
with a payor or seller of prescription drugs a price that does not exceed the referenced rate 
for that drug.  
 
D.  The Superintendent of Insurance shall assess a penalty of $500,000 or the amount of 
annual savings determined by the superintendent in accordance with subsection 6, 
whichever is greater, on any manufacturer or distributor  of a referenced drug, that the 
superintendent determines has withdrawn a referenced drug from sale or distributi on in the 
State in violation of paragraph A or B or has failed to negotiate in good faith in violation of 
paragraph C.  
 
In summary, to protect  the security of the supply chain and to ensure that Maine patients retain timely 
access to essential drugs , HDA respectfully urges the Committee not advance these measures at 
this juncture.  However , if either LD 1816 or LD 1829 are advanced, we would further  request that 
distributors be struck from Section 2, per the redlines above.  
 
HDA would like to thank you for  your consideration  of our concerns, and  invites you to contact Kelly 
Memphis  at kmemphis@hda.org  for any further discussion.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Kelly Memphis  
Director, State Government Affairs  
Healthcare Distribution Alliance  

