 1 In Opposition to Maine L .D. 1829 and L.D. 1816 
 
May 15, 2023 
 
Position:  PhRMA respectfully opposes Senate Bill L.D. 1829 and House Bill L.D. 1816.  PhRMA believes 
that discussions about the affordability of medicines are important, but the intention of the se bills is for 
the government to set  drug prices, which could limit the prescription options available to Mainers .  
L.D.  1829 and L.D. 1816 shortsightedly target drug spending in ways that likely will have long -term, 
harmful effects on innovation and the development of new, life -saving therapies.  
  
Specifically, L.D. 1829 and L.D. 1816 automatically impose a price control in the commercial insurance market 
based on the Medicare “maximum fair price .”  Regulating drug price s in-state could lead to a shortage of or limit 
access to medicines for patients.  Specifically, if a pharmacy or provider cannot obtain a medicine at the 
government price, the medicine will not be available to Maine residents.   Further, government price setting 
disincentivizes the development of innovative treatments, as has been seen in Europe.   
 
This legislation ignores that there are meaningful policies for addressing affordability without utilizing 
government price setting that could reduce treatment options.  
  
PhRMA is increasingly concerned that the substantial rebates and discounts paid by pharmaceutical 
manufacturers, approximately $256 billion in 2022,1 do not make their way to offsetting patient costs at the 
pharmacy counter.   In a report issued by the Maine Bureau of Insurance in March of 2022, carriers reported that 
they, or their contracted PBMs, received directly or indirectly from pharmaceutical manufacturers, developers, or labelers a total of $ 97,381379.84 in the 2021 calendar year.  Carriers minimally passed this remuneration on to 
patients at the point of sale :  ranging from 0% to 5%.
2  Conservatively, that means that  at least 95% of revenue 
derived from manufacturers does offset patient cost -sharing at the pharmacy counter.   
 
Patients need concrete reforms that will help lower the price they pay for medicines at the pharmacy .  For 
example, there is legislation pending in Maine  that would require 100% of these negotiated savings to pass 
through to patients at the pharmacy counter (L.D. 1165).  Studies have shown that passing prescription drug rebates to patients will have minimal impact on health insurance premiums and can provide $100s -  $1000s of 
savings for patients with high prescription drug out -of-pocket costs.
3  One study demonstrated that, even if health 
insurance companies were required to share all the negotiated rebates with patients, premiums would increase at most 0.6%, while patients could save up to $1,000 each year on their medicine costs.
4    
 
1 Fein, A. “The 2023 Economic Report on U.S. Pharmacies and Pharmacy Benefit Managers,” Drug Channels Institute. March 2023.  
2 Maine Bureau of Insurance.  “2021 Annual Report on Prescription Drug Compensation for the Benefit of Covered Persons.”  March 
2022.  
3 Ding, Y. Miller, G.E. “ The Impact of  Sharing Drug Rebates at the Point of Sale on Out -of-Pocket Payments for Enrollees in 
Employer -Sponsored Insurance .” International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research, Inc. September 13, 2022; 
Jonaitis, E. , Klein, M., Petroske, J. “ Measuring the Impact of Point of Sales Rebates on the Commercial Health Insurance Market .” 
Milliman. July 2021.  
4 https://www.milliman.com/en/insight/measuring -impact -point -of-sale-rebates -commercial -health -insurance -market -january -2022.  

 2 This legislation does not account for insurance benefit design issues that prevent discounts from flowing 
to patients, and L.D. 1829 and L.D. 1816 assume incorrectly that the price a patient pays is determined 
solely by drug manu facturers.  
  
This legislation singles out the biopharmaceutical industry and ignores the variety of stakeholders involved in 
determining what consumers ultimately pay for a medicine, including insurers, pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs), wholesalers, and the government.  The important role that these entities play in determining drug 
coverage and patient out -of-pocket costs is overlooked by the requirements of this legislation.  For example, PBMs 
and payers —which dictate the terms of coverage for medicines and the amount a patient ultimately pays —
negotiate substantial rebates and discounts.  
 
   
According to research from the Berkeley Research Group (BRG), rebates, discounts, and fees account for an increasing share of spending for brand medicines each year, while the share received by manufacturers has decreased over time.  In 2020 manufacturers retained only 49.5% of brand medicine spending while members of 
the supply chain retained 50.5%.
5  Increased rebates and discounts have largely offset the modest increases in list 
prices and reflect the competitive market for brand medicines.    
  
The growth of net prices, which reflects rebates and discounts, has been in line with or below inflation for the past five years.   Specifically, average net prices for brand medicines stayed flat (0.0% growth) in 2022.
6  This, of 
course, does not necessarily reconcile with what patients are feeling at the pharmacy counter, which is why looking at the whole system is so important.  For example, despite manufacturers’  rebates and discounts negotiated by 
health plans, nearly half of commercially insured patients’ out -of-pocket spending for brand medicines is based 
on the medicine’s list price rather than the negotiated price that health plans receive.
7  
 PhRMA opposes price setting, including referencing the Maximum Fair Price (MFP).  
 These bills would automatically apply the MFP to the commercial market in Maine.  Implementation of the 
Inflation Redution Act  and the complex framework of its MFP provisions is at an early stage, and many 
operational and legal issues remain to be sorted out.  Maine would be locking itself into a price that has not been implemented.  Further, the MFP wou ld specifically be crafted  for Medicare participants and not Maine’s residents.  
Implementing a price control, even if referencing Medicare’s MFP, could have devastating consequences for Mainers, including those waiting for new, innovative treatments.  
Price controls on brand medicines raise constitutional concerns.    
   
Among other constitutional concerns, a pplication of price controls to patented medicines raises concerns under 
the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution  because it would restrict the goal of federal patent law, which is 
to provide pharmaceutical patent holders with the economic value of exclusivity during the life of a patent.  
Congress determined that this economic reward provides appropriate incentive f or invention and Maine is not 
free to diminish the value of that economic reward. Specifically, in the case of  BIO v. District of Columbia, 496 
F.3d 1362 (2007) , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit overturned a District of Columbia law 
imposi ng price controls on branded drugs, reasoning that the law at issue conflicted with the underlying objectives 
of the federal patent framework by undercutting a company’s ability to set prices for its patented products.  
 
 
 
5 BRG: The Pharmaceutical Supply Chain 2013 -2020. January 2022.   
6 IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. The Use of Medicines in the U.S. 2023. Published April 2023. Accessed May 2023. 
https://www.iqvia.com/insig hts/the -iqvia -institute/reports/the -use-of-medicines -in-the-us-2023.  
7 IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. Medicine spending and affordability in the United States. Published August 2020. 
Accessed August 2020. https://www.iqvia.com/insights/theiqvia -institute/reports/medicine -spending -and-affordabilityin -the-us  
Acces sed May 2023.  https://www.maine.gov/pfr/sites/maine.gov.pfr/files/inline -files/2021_pbm_report.pdf . 
 3 Price controls could severely redu ce Maine patients’ access to medicines, as is seen abroad.  
 
Enacting price controls could restrict patients’ access to medicines  and reduce the availability of life -saving 
therapies in Maine.  Specifically, if a pharmacy or provider cannot obtain a medicine at the government price, the medicine will not be available to Maine residents.  Additionally, providers could be left with substa ntial costs if 
they acquired the drug before the price control is in place yet could not bill for reimbursement that covers their acquisition costs.  
Research shows that U.S. patients enjoy earlier and less restrictive access to new therapies.8  In countr ies with 
government price controls, patients have access to just half of medicines launched globally since 2012, 
compared to 85% in the United States.9  In the United Kingdom, patients have access to 59% of new medicines 
launched globally since 2012, 50% in France, and 44% in Canada.  Not only are patients in these countries 
unable to access as many medicines compared to patients in the United States, there is a significant delay in the 
availability of new medicines.   In the United States, the average delay in availability after U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration ( FDA ) approval is 0- 3 months compared to 13 months in the United Kingdom, 20 months in 
France, and 18 months in Canada.10  When governments in other countries have implemented price setting 
policies , Research and Development (R&D) investment and innovation have significantly declined because 
governments choose via these policies which diseases are worth investing in and which are not.11  Until the 
1970s, the majority of innovative medicines were deve loped in Europe.  After adopting stringent price setting 
measures, Europe trails the United States in R&D investment by more than 40%.12  
 
We urge you to vote no on L.D. 1829 and L.D. 1816 for these reasons.   
 
 
 
8 IQVIA Institute,  Global  Oncology Trends  2017,  Advances,  Complexity  and Cost.   May  2017.  
9 PhRMA analysis of IQVIA MIDAS and U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), Japan 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA), Austral ia Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) and Health Canada data. 
July 2022.  
10 PhRMA  analysis  of IQVIA MIDAS  and country regulatory data.  October  2022.   
11 The Historical Impact of Price Controls on the Biopharma Industry. Vital Transformation. 11 November  
2021.  https://vitaltransformation.com/2021/11/the -historical- impact -of-price -controls -on-the-biopharma -industry/ .  
12 Gunter Verheugen, Vice -President of the European Commission for Enterprise and Industry. 2005. “Biotechnology’s contribution to 
an innovative and competitive Europe.” Lyon.  April 14, 2005.  
