May 15, 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey  
Representative Anne Perry  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance, and Financial Services ; 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on LDs 18 16 and 1829, two bills that would institute a reference -
based cap on the price that pharmacies and state -regulated health plans could  pay to  purchase ce rtain 
prescription drugs.  I fully agree with sponsors an d proponents of this bill that the cost of prescription drugs is a 
serious problem  for consumers, and  I support government intervention to address the problem. It is with regret 
that I opposed these bills, out of concern about how a reference -based pricing  program would operate in 
practice.  
 
In particular, I am concerned about limited power to en force participation in t he prog ram by p harmaceutical 
manu factu rers. While the bills contemplate the l evying of penalties should a manufacturer withdraw its product  
from sale in the State of Maine, it seems likely that manu facturers would conti nue to sell their product to the 
payers in the state who are  not bound by the reference -price requirements. I am also concerned about how 
pharmacies, es pecially independent pharma cies, would be expected to comply with the pr ovision capping the 
price they may pay for drugs included in the prog ram. Pharmacies typically purchase their sup ply of p rescription 
drugs from wholesalers, which in turn purchase the drugs from manu facturers. Depending on the pricing 
dynamic between the reference rate and the acqui sition  cost for wholesalers , pharmacies may not have the 
leverage necessary to compel wholesalers to se ll to them at , or below, the required maximum pr ice. This issue 
may be fu rther complicated  by the fractured application of the reference -based pricing program , which only 
applies to state -regulated plans.  
 
Establishing a program like those co ntemplated in L Ds 18 16 and 1829 would come at a significant cost to the 
State. New infrastructure for analysis , monitoring, and enforcement would all need to be established. Before 
making that investment , policymakers should be confident about the feasibility of implementing the program . 
The Office of Affordable Health Care has a role in supporting Maine ’s Prescription  Drug Af fordability Board , and 
would welcome engaging  with that group and other stakeholders to discuss how the concerns above might be 
resolved , as well as alternative policy interventions to lower costs for consumers , before the next legislative 
session . 
 
Again, I am in full support of government inte rvention to directly address the high price of drugs, and look 
forward to working with the legislature to develop proposals that can deliver meaningful relief to consumers.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Meg Garratt -Reed  
Execu tive Director, Office of Affordable Health Care  

