Rachel Anderson
Boothbay
LD 1829
Good morning;
My name is Rachel Anderson. I am on several medications and with my coverme.gov 
health insurance, the co pay can sometimes be over $50.00 at a time, so I have to 
choose between taking medication or taking the risk of getting sick just to eat.  I am 
on currently 25 medications total. 8 of them are for my diabeties. The other hurdle 
that I face is the Anthem policy I am on only covers 30 day perscriptions at a time, 
even though it's written for 90 days.  Rather then paying one price for 90 days, I have 
to pay for 3 perscriptions in 90 days for EACH of my medications. This has been the 
case since Coverme.gov was put into place. Prior to Maine getting its own plan, I was 
able to get 90 day perscriptions. 
In addition to paying for my health insurance and many doctor appointments, my 
co-pays just to see the endocronologist (or any other specialist) is $70.00 each visit. 
$40.00 for each time I need to see my primary care doctor. I can't afford to pay these 
co pays AND perscriptions that they may want me to provide. Often, my doctors will 
spend time during our visit to help me find resources to help me pay for the 
medication. The last time I went to the Dr last week, they helped me find a cheaper 
medication for my kidneys, AND gave me a bag of non perishable food as I haven't 
been getting 40 hours at work.
At the beginning of 2023, I had to go to my credit union and take out a loan to cover 
my medications and medical visits because my coverme.gov deductable was over 
$8,500. My annual income is only $34,000. 
Choosing between medications, and keeping my lights on is not always an easy task. 
Many months I rob Peter to pay Paul. As a diabetic, I'm encouraged often to eat 
better, however paying a $25.00 co pay or more monthly for 25 perscriptions, its not 
easy to do. Im often left with eating things that arent healthy for me so I can buy my 
insilun, kidney medication, thyroid medication, other diabetic medications and 
supplies.
I'm asking that you please support this bill so that I may have a chance at taking my 
medications as perscribed, and be able to work towards keeping myself healthy. I 
didn't ask for diabeties, and all the complications that need to be treated along with it. 
Thank you for your time.

