_ rm-'*"-
+ 
ll 
W» >5 
11;» 
Eric Brakey 1315‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 770, An Act to Prohibit Ballot Harvesting by 
Preventing a 3rd Person from Returning More than 2 Absentee Ballots per Day 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
i 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today as I present L.D. 7'70, "An 
Act to Prohibit Ballot Harvesting by Preventing a 3rd Person from Returning More than2 
Absentee Ballots per Day." 
Imagine for a moment that someone goes in to an assisted living facility and meets your aging 
mother or father. After a short discussion, the individual asks them to ﬁll out some paperwork 
that in turn would beneﬁt this stranger in one way or another. As the child, interested in their 
well-being, this would likely be very worrisome to you knowing that your parent was l) 
pressured into doing something, and 2) may not have been aware of the extent of harm this could 
ultimately cause them. 
Similarly, we should also ﬁnd it worrisome when individuals are paid by political organizations 
and campaigns to go door-to-door or into assisted living facilities to have individuals ﬁll out an 
absentee ballot that the individual then returns on their behalf. Unlike when voting by Absentee 
Ballot at a polling location, there is no privacy with ballot harvesting. Therefore, there is no way 
of ensuring that an individual is ﬁlling out their ballot anonymously and in a way that is most 
beneﬁcial to them.'
> 
This bill aims to reduce the potential for mass paid political operatives seeking out individuals to 
vote a certain way by ensuring a third—party cannot turn in more than two ballots per day. Atthe 
same time, it keeps intact the ability for someone to help an individual, such as an immediate 
family member, turn their ballot in that may not otherwise be able to make it to the polls. 
We have seen cases where ballot harvesting is impacting the outcomes of elections nationwide. 
This legislation would help to eliminate that in Maine. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
