_ P0 Box 7860 
. Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES lllllﬂll‘ 
Maine '' 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
4I 
OughtNot to Pass - LD 770 
An Act to Prohibit Ballot Harvesting by Preventing a 3rd Person
~ 
, from Returning More than 2 Absentee Ballots per Day t~ 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
- 
. March 13, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am policy director 
for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On 
behalf of our members, I urge you to reject LD 770. _; 
If enacted, LD 770 would prohibit a third person from returning more than two absentee ballots 
per day to a municipal clerk’s ofﬁce. This bill will disenfranchise elderly voters, unhoused 
voters, and voters with disabilities, since its restrictions will make it harder for staff at-nursing 
homes, assisted living facilities, and homeless “ shelters to drop off people’s absentee ballots for 
them. This bill would solve no problem while endangering the right to vote. The perceived 
problems of voter fraud and so-called “ballot harvesting ” are designed to reverse decades of 
success across the country expanding voting access and widening the democratic process to 
historically disenfranchised populations.‘ 
Threats to the right to vote are especially dangerous because the right to vote is protective of all 
other rights. The right to vote is protected by more constitutional amendments — the First, 
Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Nineteenth, Twenty-Fourth and Twenty-Sixth — than any other right we 
enjoy as Americans. That is because voting is the cornerstone of our democracy. The power of 
the vote by the people is our ultimate safeguard against corruption and abuse of power by the 
government. We urge you in all of your deliberations to seek ways in which the right to vote can 
be expanded, to promote rather than restrict participation, and to ensure that the integrity of our 
elections is protected, so that the elections reﬂect the will of the citizemy, rather than the power 
of a few.4 
Maine has long been a national leader in voting rights. We are only one of two states that allow 
incarcerated people to vote. We are among a minority of states with same-day voter-registration. 
This bill would take us backwards, diluting a fundamental right. We urge this committee to vote 
ought not to pass. _‘
_‘
