Maine Coast Heritage Trust 
A Statewide Land Conservation Organization 
Testimony in Support of LD 596 
An Act to Exempt Certain Conservation Lots from Municipal Subdivision Review 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Jeff Romano. l appreciate this opportunity to provide 
testimony on behalf of Maine Coast Heritage Trust in support of LD 596. Joining our testimony 
are twenty-eight land trusts from around the state. 
Maine Coast Heritage Trust conserves and stewards Maine's coastal lands and islands for their 
renowned scenic beauty, ecological value, outdoor recreational opportunities, and contribution 
to community well-being. We provide statewide conservation leadership through our work with 
land trusts, coastal communities, and other partners. Over the past five decades, we have 
conserved more than 150,000 acres in Maine. 
MCHT also works in partnership with more than 80 land trusts in Maine including the twenty- 
eight organizations that have joined this testimony. Collectively, our state's land trust 
community has conserved more than 2.8 million acres protecting working landscapes, 
enhancing public access for traditional uses, and preserving valuable wildlife habitats. 
Although not likely to be used often, the targeted exemption in LD 596 is a commonsense 
change to Maine's Municipal Subdivision Law. ln short, it will provide conservation-minded 
landowners with a new incentive to permanently conserve a portion of their property in those 
instances when doing so would be the third division in five years, thus triggering the time- 
consuming and costly requirements of subdivision review. 
This proposed change is consistent with the purposes of the state's subdivision law, as the 
factors planning boards must assess when weighing subdivisions include pollution, erosion, 
sewage disposal, impacts to ground water, and a variety of other considerations generally 
attributable to development activities. On the other hand, rather than contributing to these 
concerns land conservation often mitigates their impacts. 
More than two decades ago the state identified the benefit of enacting a conservation 
exemption for subdivision review within Maine's unorganized townships. This law has worked 
well in the northern half of the state for over twenty years. LD 596 would simply extenda 
similar, but stronger provision to all property owners in Maine. 
Page 1 of2
We encourage the committee to vote ought to pass on LD 596. This bill will not only encourage 
conservation but result in savings that would be better spent on taking care of the protected 
properties for the benefit and enjoyment of Maine people. 
Kennebunkport Conservation Trust 
Royal River Conservation Trust 
Blue Hill Heritage Trust 
Rangeley Lakes Heritage Trust 
Midcoast Conservancy 
Presumpscot Regional Land Trust 
Southern Maine Conservation Collaborative 
7 Lakes Alliance 
Peaks island Land Preserve 
Mount A to the Sea Conservation Collaborative 
Boothbay Region Land Trust 
Friends of Wilson Pond 
Mahoosuc Land Trust 
Brunswick-Topsham Land Trust 
Page 2 of 2 Kennebec Estuary Land Trust 
Forest Society of Maine 
The Conservation Fund 
Scarborough Land Trust 
Kennebec Land Trust 
The Nature Conservancy 
Appalachian Trail Land Trust 
Three Rivers Land Trust 
Western Foothills Land Trust 
Kittery Land Trust 
Bangor Land Trust 
Maine Farmland Trust 
Cape Elizabeth Land Trust 
Great Works Land Trust
