 
Thomas L. Douglas     Sarah A. McDaniel      Benjamin P. Campo, Jr.  
PO Box  410  ▪ Westbrook, ME  0409 8  ▪  P (207) 591 -5747  ▪  F (207) 591 -5752  ▪  www.douglasmcdaniel.com  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 596  
 
 My name is Sarah McDaniel, I am an attorney in private practice at Douglas McDaniel & 
Campo LLC, PA here in the State of Maine  and live in New Gloucest er.  I am testifying on my 
own behalf asking the Committee  on Environment and Natural Resources  to support passage of 
L.D. 596 , An Act to Exempt Certain Conservation Lots from Municipal Subdivision Review . 
 
 In the course of my practice I represent landowners and nonprofit land t rusts from all 
across the State.  Over the years, several of my clients have faced challenges to their land 
planning that passage of L.D. 596 can resolve.  
 
The laws requiring review and permitting of subdivisions are designed to ensure that 
development of land protects  the environment and  public safety.  The establishment of parcels 
of protected conservation land does not pose the  same  traffic or other development threats that 
subdivision law is designed to address.  Yet, t he costs associated with municipal review can 
often impede landowners from putting a portion of their land into conservation, or cause them to 
delay protecting their land.   
 
Two decades ago the Legislature adopted  an exception  to a reviewable subdivision  in the 
unorganized territories for when  the division of land create s a lot for conservation  purposes so 
long as  that lot  is to be  owned by either a government entity or nonprofit land conservation 
organization .  12 M.R.S. § 682-B (codified by LUPC at Chpt 10.25.Q) .  This re duces an 
obstacle for landowners who want to protect the wildlife habitat, scenic , agricultural and natural 
resource  values of their land, but is currently only available in the LUPC jurisdiction.  
 
The proposed exemption  in L.D. 596 will apply in all towns in Maine and is tightly 
limited to those situations where the parcel will be permanently preserved for conservation with 
the protection secured by either a governmental entity or a nonprofit land conservation 
organization.  
 
 As land owners make plans for their land , they are mindful of compliance with the 
subdivision statute.  L .D. 596 will allow landowners  all across the State  more flexibility to 
achieve their personal land conservation goals  without delay, thus also helping to reach  the 
Maine Climate Council ’s goal of 30% of the State  in land conservation  by 20 30, as outlined in 
Strategy (E)(1) of their December 2020 action plan . 
 
 I strongly urge the Committee to pass L .D. 596.  I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
 
Respectfully submitted this 5th day of April 2023,  
Sarah A. McDaniel  
Maine Bar No. 9506  
