HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Allison Heme, TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
417 Montsweag Rd. 
Woolwich. ME 04579 
Phone: (207,) 319-4396 
AllIson.Hepler@legislature.maine.gov 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Allison Hepler presenting 
LD 1234, An Act to Provide Reimbursement for Health Care Expenses of Retired State 
Police Law Enforcement Dogs 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-C enter, Representative Salisbury and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Allison Hepler, and I represent the towns of 
Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich. I am pleased to introduce LD 
1234, An Act to Provide Reimbursement for Health Care Expenses of Retired State Police 
Law Enforcement Dogs. 
We have all seen law enforcement dogs in action — working in Search and rescue operations, 
tracking down illegal narcotics, deterring criminal activity, and participating in cadaver searches. 
These canines are in service until around nine years of age, after which they are retired into the 
hands of their “handler, ” who is the police ofﬁcer who has worked with the dog during the dog’s 
service. They have been partners. 
At that point, the handler becomes 100% responsible for the dog’s care. Retired dogs live about 
three to ﬁve years and can develop a number of conditions common to many older dogs, such as 
arthritis, knee. hip and back injuries. Working dogs — and these dogs have worked hard while in 
service to the State — would be at a higher risk for such injuries. 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety to reimburse authorized handlers of retired law 
enforcement dogs that were used in service by the State Police up to $5,000 per year for health 
care expenses of their dogs. At any given time, there are about 12 retired dogs, which amounts to 
up to $60,000 per year. 
Many private entities already volunteer their services. For example, Elanco Animal Health and 
Idexx provide annual “wellness ” clinics where active and retired dogs receive ﬂea and tick 
medication, vaccines, as well as basic testing. 
We are grateful to the people and companies that provide services for free. It is time for us to do 
our part. These dogs are state employees worthy of some of the services given to our human state 
workers. Paying some of the costs of their care seems like a reasonable beneﬁt we can provide to 
these retired ofﬁcers. 
District 49: Arrowsic. Georgetown. Phippsburg. West Bath and Woolwich
