 
   
 
Stacey Ober , J.D.  
Government Relations 
Regional Manager  
New England  
   
 
 
 
April  20, 2023  
 
The Honorable Pinny Beebe -Center , Senate Chair  
The Honorable  Suzanne Salisbury , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
100 State House Station, Cross Building,  Room 436 
Augusta , Maine 04333  
 
RE: Support LD 1234 , Provide Reimbursement for Health Care Expenses of Retired State Police Law 
Enforcement Dogs  
 
Dear Chair Beebe -Center , Chair Salisbury , and Members of the Joint Committee :  
 
Founded in 1884, the American Kennel Club (AKC) is a not -for-profit organization that is recognized as a trusted expert 
in canine health, breeding, and training.  We advocate for the purebred dog as a family companion and promote the ideals 
of responsible dog ownership.  We represent over 5,000 do g clubs nationally, including  30 in Maine , which represent 
thousands of dog owners.  In 20 21, AKC licensed and sanctioned 1 11 events in Maine  where more than 9,000 dogs 
participated.  Surveys estimate that exhibitors spend $ 863 per show weekend, many of wh om travel into Maine  to 
participate.  
 
LD 1234 would require the Department of Public Safety to reimburse authorized handlers of  retired law enforcement dogs 
that were used in service by the State Police up to $5,000 per year for health care expenses of the ir dogs.   AKC values the 
contribution that these  dogs make to national security and the extraordinary role that these dogs play in protecting the 
peace and security of individuals, communities, and nations.  We honor the breeders, trainers, and handlers of these 
working dogs  in order to  provide  a variet y of valuable services such as handicapped assistance; drug, bomb, and arson 
detection; and tracking to locate missing persons or fugitives .  Programs such as AKC’s  Detection Dog Taskforce  support 
breeding programs to ensure that sufficient high quality domestically -bred dogs are available to ensure public safety and 
national security.  
 
Providing veterinary medical  care to assure the wellbeing of these  retired  dogs is a high AKC priority  and AKC strongly 
supports LD 1234.   We urge the committee to  pass LD 1234 .  If I can be of any further assistance, I can be reached at 
stacey.ober@akc.org  or (919) 816 -3348.  Thank you.  
 
Regards,  
 
Government Relations Regional Manager, New England  
 
Cc:  The Honorable Allison Hepler , Sponsor LD 1234  
        Gary Anderson, President, Federation of Maine Dog Clubs  

