.. , 3 HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Amy Roeder 
45 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-3 70-5517 
Am§LRoeg§;@Iegj_sl g_mre.maine,_ggLv 
March 21, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 946, An Act Regarding Unemployment Beneﬁts for Part-time Faculty at Public 
Colleges and Universities 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping and fellow distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes a portion 
of Bangor. Today, I present to you LD 946, An Act Regarding Unemployment Beneﬁts for Part-time 
Faculty at Public Colleges and Universities.I 
As an adjunct faculty member, I was told that the class I currently teach would be mine to teach in 
perpetuity. While that is somewhat reassuring, a casual chat in the office of a department head who is no 
longer my department head is not a guarantee. I have heard from many of my part-time faculty colleagues 
that they never really know if their classes will be taken away from them. Sometimes, those colleagues 
have those classes taken away the day before classes start. In those cases, when a part-time faculty 
member loses a class they expected to teach, there is currently uncertainty over whether or not that 
part-time faculty member is eligible for unemployment. When We set up our classes, when we vet our 
textbooks and materials, when we build our online classes, when we write our lesson plans and when we 
write those syllabi that our students never actually read, we do all of this without compensation. If the 
classes We have worked on so diligently are taken off our plates, we receive nothing. 
This bill allows those who teach in public education settings on a part-time basis for at least six semesters 
spanning three academic years to qualify for retirement beneﬁts if they are not employed by the institution 
for the next academic semester, which includes the public education institution canceling a class (as long 
as the termination occurs no later than 60 days after the start of the class). It has been brought to my 
attention that there may be issues of compliance with our current federal legislation, but I hope to work 
through these potential issues with stakeholders. 
Thank you for your consideration. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 23: Part of Bangor5
K 
it 
it 
it 
§.
, 
$1 
i. 
ti
at
