E“; Maine Communityt 
§ College System 
OFFICE OF THE PRESlDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 t Fax (207) 629-4048 l mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations 
RE: Testimony in opposition to LD 946, An Act Regarding Unemployment Beneﬁts for 
Part-time Faculty at Public Colleges and Universities 
DATE: March 21, 2023 
-" ': J".-:.*.*.::;:;¢~ ,.*:1*3v~uL ’ .,.f4\~4'a¢ “-;*~ﬁ~i‘ :;—-;~;,::+saoeaun>:m-e —.-_=~».:»~u».:.-.~»» »..":‘:~#“‘4—“%’-'“ .. "."_“ ,“““; ﬁeiarl” ,-;\-4~ll4I ﬂhs=1L‘;;*;:*1-¥*C “,‘ '" 
prev»!-'1-¢ ﬂ5\l'" . '::1:~¢4-iii ‘ ‘ .*:*iII|inur-:.:_ ...3-=5“ 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, good afternoon. My name is Becky Smith, and I am the 
Director of Government and Community Relations for the Maine Community College System. I 
am here to present testimony in opposition to LD 946. 
Maine’s community colleges, like colleges and universities across the United States, hires 
knowledgeable professionals each semester, on a semester basis, to teach courses to our students. 
These professionals often work other full-time jobs and are teaching to share their industry 
expertise with the next generation of Maine’s workforce, the workers who will become nurses, 
EMTs, linesmen, auto mechanics, machinists, or perhaps those in urgent need after the freeze 
earlier this year: plumbers and carpenters. As job requirements shift and skills shift, MCCS is 
able to supplement the academic program by bringing up-to-date knowledge to the classroom. 
These professionals help MCCS to meet its statutorily deﬁned mission to create an educated, 
skilled and adaptable labor force that is responsive to the changing needs of the economy of the 
State and to promote local, regional and statewide economic development. ‘ 
Statutorily mandating unemployment beneﬁts for adjunct faculty will increase the cost of 
meeting our mission. 
As just noted, by the very nature, adjunct faculty are part time instructors, often teaching two or 
fewer courses. In Spring 2023, 39% are teaching just one course; 32% of adjunct faculty are 
teaching two courses; 16% are teaching three courses; 13% of adjunct faculty are teaching four 
courses. 
Unemployment eligibility, under current Maine law, is based on wages earned. Here, the bill 
removes the wage eligibility requirement and replaces it with a three-year vesting period. The 
bill treats adjunct faculty as a special class, entitled to a special beneﬁt not afforded to other 
unemployed workers. Unemployment beneﬁts provide ﬁnancial relief for individuals who have 
lost their job through no fault of their own, such as a layoff or termination due to downsizing. 
This is not the case with a faculty member — whether they are in our MSEA Adjunct unit or in 
the MEA Faculty unit. They are on a pre-determined break from classes while students are away 
1 20-A M.R.S. §12703 it
t
K 
F} 
it 
=r 
ft 
>4 
i i
t 
it
x 
ii
i 
it 
gl 
‘f
» 
ii 
l.
5»
from campus. Adjunct faculty who are teaching the following semester have reasonable 
assurance in the form of their teaching contract. To the best of our knowledge, there is no other 
category of unemployment that uses a different eligibility requirement. To base the beneﬁt on 
semesters taught for public higher education seems a very speciﬁc focus and one we do not 
believe is allowed under Federal law.2 
MCCS recognizes that some adjunct faculty have taught for numerous years at the Colleges. For 
example, nine percent of the adjunct faculty teaching Spring 2023 have taught for 16 or more 
years. Yet over half of those individuals are teaching six or fewer credits—or just one or two 
classes. We are grateful to these individuals, some of whom are MCCS employees who also 
decide to teach in addition to their administrative duties, for their dedication to the students. 
Where MCCS sees a long-term need for faculty, it endeavors to hire full-time faculty and not 
rely on adjunct instruction. Over the last ﬁve years, MCCS has hired 141 full time faculty, of 
which 41% were formerly adjunct instructors. 
I mentioned this bill would increase the cost for MCCS to meet its mission and we are preparing 
a ﬁscal note. Analysis is difﬁcult, based on the proposed eligibility framework. 
Given the existing law, and the unique nature of adjunct instruction, I respectfully request that 
this committee report that this bill Ought Not to Pass. I am happy to convey any questions that 
the Committee may have to the appropriate MCCS individuals and provide answers to you. 
Thank you. 
Z 
26 U.S.C. § 3304(a)(6)(A), known as the "equal treatment" provision.
