Jill Cote
Richmond
LD 946
The majority of those teaching college at the college level in this country are adjuncts, and 
Maine is no exception.
Colleges and Universities save themselves money by employing adjuncts rather than full-time
professors that require tenure and/or benefits.
The number of courses an adjunct professor can teach per semester is intentionally limited to 
3 per college so that colleges and universities avoid the associated costs of being required to 
pay benefits. That means those of us who are “full-time” adjuncts teach at a variety of Maine 
colleges to make ends meet.
Teaching at more than one campus often means adjusting our curriculum and mode of 
teaching, and dealing with a new college structure and system from offices to learning and 
grading platforms. The demographics of students vary from campus to campus, and we must 
adjust our teaching to that as well. Imagine a kindergarten teacher traveling to three schools 
per week across Maine, not knowing which class or school she will be asked to teach until a 
few weeks prior. We’d never allow it. But that is the life of the adjunct professor.  
 
Colleges and Universities lost money during the pandemic and adjuncts suffered as a result. 
Our courses were sometimes overloaded with students to compensate for depleted funds 
from lower enrollment, but we were offered fewer courses overall. Please keep in mind that 
we are paid PER course, not per student.
Many adjuncts would love a full-time position teaching. I know I would. I’ve wanted to teach 
college since I was a student myself, and I have been teaching since 2008, hoping to be 
full-time.
 I would teach year-round if I were able to as well, and I would much prefer to teach at one 
college rather than the three I’m at currently. This is not a possibility due to policies meant to 
keep adjuncts from accessing any more than the 6 to $7000 they make teaching “full-time” 
per semester, per college.
I haven’t been offered to teach a summer course since the pandemic hit. 
If I am to remain a professor, I must collect unemployment during the summer. 
None of us is getting rich collecting unemployment, we are simply surviving until the next 
semester.
Some will say that we adjuncts should find more secure employment if we don’t want that 
volatility, but keep in mind that if we were to do that the colleges and universities that Maine 
counts on to educate its workforce would lose more than half of its college teaching staff. 
Every day I teach Maine’s future teachers. nurses, counselors, and first responders. Maine 
can’t afford to reduce the number of people we are sending into these professions. Without 
adjunct professors. such training isn't possible. I'm of course hoping for a future where full 
time adjunct positions are created as a means of offering steady employment to those of us 
who have committed to teaching at Maine's colleges, but in the mean time I'm advocating for 
access to unemployment to help make it possible for us to help support our families and 
continue in this profession.

