Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
Neither For Nor Against  
LD 946: An Act Regarding Unemployment Benefits for Part -time Faculty at Public Colleges 
and Universities   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Labor and Housing Committee  
March  21, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee,  
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him)  and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state an d faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA neither for nor against LD 946, An Act Regarding 
Unemployment Benefits for Part -time Faculty at Public Colleges and  Universities .   
 
We certainly appreciate the bill before you is an attempt to allow regular part -time or adjunct faculty to 
qualify for unemployment benefits in certain circumstances, but I am here today to remind the 
Committee of another problem with our  current unemployment system.   
 
Under current law, hourly school employees do not qualify for unemployment benefits if they are 
provided a “reasonable assurance” from their school district that they will be employed in the next 
school year.1  This serves  as a major disadvantage for hourly school employees.   
 
Hourly school employees such as ed techs and bus drivers play critical roles in our public schools.  
Schools cannot function without them.  Yet the pay is often low.  In too many districts, some posi tions 
are paid the state minimum wage of $13.80 per hour.  I am sure you can understand with such low wages 
and often part time hours, many hourly school employees struggle to pay for basic needs.  Many must 
seek work over the summer in other jobs just to make ends meet, sometimes competing with their own 
students for summer jobs.  For many, working over the summer is not optional – it’s required just to stay 
afloat.  All of these factors contribute to the workforce shortages happening all over the state in  public 
education.   
 
 
 
 
1 Please see Title 26, Chapter 13 §1192  
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
It is important to note, the section of law disqualifying hourly school employees from unemployment 
benefits does not include private contractors.  Bus drivers employed by a private contractor, not a school 
district, are eligible  and can often qualify for unemployment when school is not in session.  I hope the 
Committee recognizes the unfairness.   
 
The disqualification of hourly school employees from the unemployment program has been a perennial 
problem and a solution has eluded us.  Placing hourly school employees into the unemployment system 
will cost money for school districts.  Last session, this Committee debated LD 1509: An Act To Provide 
That Maine's School Bus Drivers Are Eligible for Unemployment Insurance in Certain Circ umstances .  
This bill was amended to allow bus drivers to qualify for unemployment benefits when school was not in 
session and proposed the state fund the entire cost.  The bill had a fiscal note of $7.3 million, was passed 
by the House and Senate and was sent to the Special Appropriations Table where it died upon 
adjournment.  This bill only included bus drivers, not ed techs and other hourly support staff who are 
often in the same predicament.   
 
I point this out to demonstrate the challenges hourly schoo l employees face.  Our focus has been to lift 
the wages of hourly support staff, rather than advocating for their inclusion in the state’s unemployment 
program.  We expect at least four bills this session to address the state’s minimum wage for hourly 
school employees, including LD 955, An Act to Address Shortages of School Support Staff by Increasing 
the Minimum Hourly Wage for Those Staff .  LD 955 proposes to lift the state’s minimum wage for 
hourly school employees to 125% of the state minimum wage.  Oth er bills propose an even higher 
minimum wage.  We will support these efforts and will remind legislators of the financial challenges 
hourly school employees face, including their exclusion from the state’s unemployment program.   
Thank you for your time an d attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.    
 
