/viciineie _ 
Public: 
* 
L1r7i\/ersifie-s 
Ul\H\/ERSlT\ ’ OF MAINE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
Regarding LD 946, An Act Regarding Unemployment Benefits for Part-time Faculty at 
Public Colleges and Universities, March 21, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing: My name is Samantha Warren and l am the Director of 
Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS).» 
Maine's public universities value and respect our faculty and staff who advance our important 
statewide mission of education, research and economic development, and public service. This 
includes our part-time faculty, nearly half of whom are teaching just one course. 
Work as a pant-time faculty member within UMS is not intended to require a full-time 
commitment nor provide full-time compensation. Instead they are paid for each course taught. 
Represented part-time faculty are limited by contract to teaching less than the equivalent ofa 
full-time course load, and unlike full-time faculty, they are typically not expected to advise 
students, participate in curricular development and committee work, or conduct research and 
outreach. 
Despite rapidly rising operational costs, modest State appropriations increases and declining 
tuition revenue, our System's usage of part-time faculty has been consistent over the last decade 
ln fall 2011, part-time faculty delivered 28% of the System's total credit hours and a decade later 
in fall 2022, they delivered 26% of total UMS credit hours. According to an analysis provided to 
the Legislature in 2019, our System’s part-time faculty compensation is comparable with peers 
nationally, and in many cases, UMS provides better benefits. 
There are many reasons why our public universities utilize part-time faculty, and in-turn why 
individuals enjoy employment as part-time faculty within UMS. For many part-time faculty, 
teaching within our System is not their primary source of income. Engaging practicing 
professionals allows our universities to deliver highly relevant, real-world education that prepares 
UMS students for success in the Maine workforce and helps them make critical connections in 
their field. For example, nursing courses may be taught by full-time nurses and law courses by 
practicing prosecutors or state and federal judges. Part-time faculty also allow our universities to 
maintain course access for students when full-time faculty are on sabbatical or medical leave. 
UMS is considered a direct reimbursement employer, meaning we pay dollar-for-dollar all of the 
unemployment benefits awarded by the State to a former worker. 
Our System has determined that there were 23 part-time faculty who had taught for at least six 
consecutive fall and spring semesters prior to the fall 2022 semester in which they did not teach. 
We are not able to determine how many of those individuals chose not to teach versus those 
who were not offered assignments by the university, and thus how many would actually apply 
for, and be awarded, unemployment benefits. However, the average maximum benefit they 
would be eligible for if LD 946 had been law was $3,783. 
l hope this information is helpful to your consideration of this legislation. Please let me know ifI 
can provide additional information on behalf of UMS prior to your work session, and thank you 
for your support of our public universities, students and dedicated employees. 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent 
University of Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
