STATE OF MAINE
  
GOVERNOR ’S OFFICE OF POLICY INNOVATION AND THE FUTURE  
181  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  
04333 -0181  
GORDON SMITH  
DIRECTOR , OPIOID RESPONSE  
PHONE 207

624

7458    WWW .MAINE .GOV /FUTURE   
 
 
April 3, 2023 
 Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Rep. Michele Meyer, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine State Legislature  
 Re:  L.D. 813, Resolve, to Study Methods to Increase Access to Medication -assisted Treatment for 
Substance Use Disorder  
 
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee:  
I am Gordon Smith of East Winthrop,  Maine and I appreciate the opportunity today to present this 
written testimony on behalf of Governor Janet T. Mills in opposition to L.D. 813.  I serve as 
Director of Opioid Response in the Governor’s Office of Policy Innovation and the Future 
(GOPIF).   
 
L.D. 813 is well intended and I appreciate Rep. Eaton submitting the proposed resolve which 
directs our GOPIF office to convene a working group to study the feasibility of and barriers to establishing a mobile methadone clinic in the State and other metho ds to increase local access to 
medication -assisted treatment for substance use disorder.  It also requires a report back to this 
committee.  Our primary reason for opposing the Resolve is that we are already engaging with a 
working group for this very purpose and are making great strides in increasing access to both methadone and all forms of buprenorphine.  And I am engaged in conversation with two of our six 
Opioid Treatment Program operators who are interested in starting a mobile unit.  These mobile 
units have only been authorized by the federal DEA for a relatively short period of time and we are 
examining how they are working in other states.  
 
Our work group consists of our Opioid Response Clinical Advisory Committee and staff from the 
Office of Behavioral Health which, along with the Division of Licensing and Certification, 
regulates the OTPs (commonly known as methadone clinics) from the state side while the DEA 
imposes stringent regulations from the federal side.  Currently, the Board of Pharmacy als o 
regulates these programs and they must be licensed as pharmacies under Chapter 26 of the Board of Pharmacy Rules.  
 Once our plans are fully developed and a timeline is established for the commencement of mobile 
methadone services, I would be happy to com municate with Rep. Eaton as well as this committee.  
 
But I believe that the provisions of L.D. 600, if implemented, would actually slow down our efforts 
which are well underway.  
Beyond the issue of the mobile methadone program, we are engaged in several o ther initiatives 
promoting access to medication assisted treatment.  These initiatives resulted in a 6% increase in buprenorphine prescriptions and an 8% increase in methadone dispensing during the second half of 
2022.  We expect to see continued growth in 2023.  Among our initiatives promoting medication 
assisted treatment are the following:  
 
• Emergency Department initiation of buprenorphine, now available in 25 of 33 hospital in 
the state.  We continue to work with the 8 hospitals not making this service a vailable 
currently.  
 
• Support for medication to be offered to all individuals residing in prisons or jails in the state.  Since 2019, over 2100 individuals in the custody of the Department of Corrections and well over 1000 residents of the county jails have  been provided at least one form of such 
medication and we recently committed over $300,000 to support a Sublocade pilot in the Somerset County jail.  Sublocade is an injectable form of buprenorphine which provides a 
steady dose of medication to the jail r esident for 30 days.  The initial results of the pilot and 
a similar program at St. Joseph’s Hospital and at Maine Medical Center have been very favorable in terms of patient satisfaction and recidivism.  
 
• With the federal government recently taking action to remove the DATA 2000 X waiver 
requirement for prescribers of medication for addiction treatment, we will be supporting the launch this summer of a campaign by the voluntary medical societies in the state 
encouraging all primary care providers to prescri be buprenorphine to patients within their 
own panels.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide this written testimony and I will make every effort to 
attend the work session and answer any questions you may have.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Gordon Smith, J.D. 
Directo r of Opioid Response  
Email: Gordon.Smith@maine.gov  
Cell: 207 -592-0859 

