 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 3 , 202 3 
 
Supporting:  
LD 813, “Resolve, to Study Methods to Increase Access to Medication -assisted Treatment for 
Substance Use Disorder ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Eaton  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA) .  
MPCA is a membership organization that includ es all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
They are at the forefront of delivering care to rural and underserved Maine communities. Community 
Health Centers provide all patients with comprehensive primary care services, as well as a host of other 
services that include transportation, translation, and case management services. They are further 
required to provide this care without regard to a patient’s insurance status or ability to pay.  
We support LD 813 and thank Representative Eaton and the cosponsors  for bringing  this legislation 
forwar d. MPCA  strongly encourage s the Committee to ensure that representatives from Maine’s CHC 
network are a part of this work group. These professionals are on the frontlines of providing care to 
those managing substance use disorders and have been  developing innovative approaches to 
providin g care. Our network also has vast experience with utilizing mobile units to deliver primary 
and preventative care, including behavioral health services.  
The opioid crisis has devastated our state, our communities,  and our families. Mainers are dying 
unnec essarily,  and the diseases of despair (addiction, depression , and suicidality) do not distinguish 
among people by age, race, gender, or socioeconomic status. As the backbone of primary care in Maine, 
most especially for the state’s most vulnerable populati ons and across  rural Maine, CHCs  have mobilized 
to address this epidemic and know that we must continue this work, increase our capacity to respond to 
this crisis, and maintain our sense of urgency.  
In 2018, in recognition of the need to allow for members to coordinate and collaborate, MPCA 
established an Opioid Work Group . In late 2019, all 20 of Maine’s CHCs pledged to mobilize to provide a 
continuous response to the opioid crisis. They developed and signed a ‘Community Health Center Pledge 
Regarding Response to the Opioid Crisis’  1 which outlined efforts that health centers would take to 
increase capacity to respond to this crisis and maintain a sense of urgency.  
 
1 https://www.dropbox.com/s/7cqmo45j7cnf3r7/CHC%20Opioid%20Pledge%202021 -11-08-FINAL.pdf?dl=0   
 
 
 
 mepca.org  Additionally, on November 18, 2021, Penobsc ot Community Health Care (PCHC) and MPCA launched a 
joint 12 -month Project ECHO on implementation of a low barrier treatment model for Opiate Use 
Disorder (OUD).2  The seven participating CHCs, along with PCHC, represented roughly 65% of the total 
patient s served by Maine’s CHC network and encompassed a significant geographic footprint, especially 
in rural areas. As a result, this pilot supported increased access to vital treatment services in areas most 
hard -hit by the opiate crisis and  aligned with priorities outlined in the treatment and recovery sections 
of the Gov ernor’s Maine Opioid Response Strategic Action Plan.3  
This project was a culmination of over three years of work to develop strategies to address OUD. Using 
the ECHO learn ing collaborative model ,4 PCHC shared its years -long journey relative to implementation 
and ongoing maintenance of the state’s first primary -care focused low barrier treatment program. 
Together, the participating health centers have started to test effect iveness and impact across multiple 
rural and urban CHCs in Maine. Through the ECHO model, teams from each of the CHCs have learned 
through case study, clinical review, and operations -focused meetings that help to address questions in 
as close to real time as possible. Experts from PCHC’s clinical and operations teams served as faculty and 
provided coaching and support to the learning sites through the Project ECHO.  
We are witnessing the lethality of fentanyl on a daily basis. The work group proposed in LD 813 would 
be an opportunity to bring stakeholders together to focus on the feasibility of and barriers to 
establishing a mobile methadone clinic in the State and other methods to increase local access to 
medication -assisted treatment for substance use diso rder. 
 
Of the two medications for OUD that have shown to reduce mortality (buprenorphine and methadone), 
methadone can be easier to initiate and be more effective in treatment retention, especially for people 
who have used higher doses of fentanyl for long er periods of time. However, access to methadone 
remains scattered in Maine, resulting in health equity issues arise when patients  are required to travel  
long distances  to an  Opioid Treatment Program (OTP).  Additionally, there is often stigma associated with 
methadone. Maine’s CHCs see potential i n discussing the role a mobile clinic could have in our state. 
Mobile clinics may help diminish stigma and  establish a minimum standard of access for  this life saving 
medication , as we have with  Narcan and buprenorphine . 
 
Again, we encourage the Committee to ensure that a representative from Maine’s Community Health 
Center network is included in this work group. T hank you for considering our comments  and for your 
work on this extremely important issue .  
 
Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
2 https://www.mainepublic.org/2021 -11-10/medication -first-opioid -treatment -model -expands -to-half-a-dozen -comm unity -
health -centers -in-maine   
3 https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.g ov.future/files/inline -
files/MaineOpioidResponse.StrategicActionPlan.FINAL_.12.11.19.pdf   
4 https://hsc.unm.edu/echo/what -we-do/about -the-echo -model.html   
