District 15: Brooklin, Deer Isle, Eagle Island Township, Frenchboro, Southwest Harbor, 
Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, I sle au Haut, Vinalhaven  March 27, 2023  
Testimony of Representative Holly Eaton introducing  
LD 813, Resolve, to Study Methods to Increase Access to Medication -assisted Treatment 
for Substance Use Disorder  
Before the Health and Human Services Committee  
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee . My name is Holly Eaton , and I represent House District 15, 
which includes the communities of Brooklin, Deer Isle, Frenchboro, Marshall Island, 
Southwest Harbor, Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, Eagle Island Township, Isle au Haut 
and Vinalhaven. I am here today to introduce  LD 813, Resolve, to Study Methods  to 
Increase Access to Medication -assisted Treatment for Substance Use Disorder . 
 
Access to the medication a person needs when they are in recovery from substance use disorder 
is critical. It hurts our neighbors and our community if folks seek help but can not actually access 
it. 
 
This resolve directs the Governor’s Office of Policy, Innovation and the Future to convene a 
working group to study the feasibility of, and barriers to, establishing a mobile methadone clinic 
in the state. The working group would a lso be charged with examining other methods to increase 
local access to medication -assisted treatment for substance use disorder.  
 
Commuting to Bangor from Deer Isle to receive treatment puts a burden on not just the person in 
recovery, but on the family and friends supporting that person through treatment. Traveling over 
an hour is absolutely a barrier, and I’d like to see this working group come up with options that 
make recovery more attainable for those seeking it.  
 
Thank you for your time and attentio n. I would be happy to answer any questions you have of 
me.  
  
Holly Rae Eaton  
63 Church Street  
Deer Isle, ME 04627  
Phone: (207) 610 -9281  
Holly.Eaton@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287-1400  
TTY:  Maine Relay 711  
 

