Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee: (5 
Thank you for your time today listening to the very real concerns of and for current, past and future 
members of the workforce in the field of Education here in Maine. 
I would like to speak directly to the bills before you to raise the minimum pay for both support staff 
and for teachers, as well as the bills to raise the cap on the Cost-of-Living increase and the increased 
state contribution to the health care insurance for our retired members of the workforce in the field of 
Education. 
As I near my own retirement, I am reminded of a conversation I recently had with my sister. She has 
retired two years ago from a career on Wall Street in New York City, about as far away from the field 
of Education as you can get. I have worked the majority of my career teaching in Aroostook County, 
about as far away from New York City as you can get! At one point in this conversation that we had, 
she made the comment to me that surely, I had a million dollars in the bank. 
I Iaughed....as I suspect both you and the others in the room just did, either aloud or in your head. 
She went on to say that at least we had a pension, in addition to our savings. While that is true, she 
went on and talked her way through HER math for her retirement, which made me start to think about 
MY math. Yes, I use math daily. When I started teaching in Maine, the minimum was NOT $30,000. I 
don't even think the minimum was $20,000. I have been teaching in this state for 35 years. For the 
purposes of (easy) math, Iet’s use the amount of $20,000 as a starting salary and $60,000 for my 
current salary. These are not exact numbers. I have received an average raise of about $1,140. That 
means that at year 27, I had made....pre-tax, pension, insurance and any other deductions.....a 
grand total of $1 ,046, 480. That sounds great! But |et’s look at what else happened during those 27 
years. My husband and I bought a house. We heat that house. We had and raised two children. We 
fed and clothed our children, and both attended college. Not expensive college, thank goodness! We 
bought a total of 6 cars, each one driven for an average of 10 years and well over 100,000 miles. My 
last car had 290,000 miles before I bought my current vehicle five years ago. lt’s ALMOST paid for. 
So, NO. We do not have $1,000,000 in the bank, for a nice little cushion as we look toward 
retirement. We have, in a nutshell, LIVED life. And not lavishly! Now, after 35 years, I have reached 
the approximate lifetime earnings of $1,504,000. I know this amount varies greatly within the state, 
and I know this disparity is even more stark when you leave the state of Maine. And the number 
DOES sound great, truly impressive. Until you remember life. Until I look at my Grandfather. He wasa 
teacher in New York State. He raised two children. He owned a home AND he owned a cottage ona 
lake. My Grandmother did not work outside the home. They had a comfortable life and a comfortable 
lifestyle. My husband and I could NOT have lived our current life on the salary of ONE teacher. 
Again, as we near retirement age, looking at what (this year) has been an unprecedented 8.9% 
inflation rate, having a cap on the COLA that is applied only to the first $24,000 of one’s hard-earned 
retirement income is simply not sustainable for our retired members. You may say this year was an 
anomaly. We can only hope! But....what if it’s NOT? Do we really want to see members of the 
Education profession trying to live on the edge of poverty and food stamps in their retirement? 
My husband and I are hoping that in retirement, we will be able to make ends meet, and have a little 
bit of a cushion. Wouldn’t it be nice to have $1 ,000,000 in the bank? But we just don‘t. 
The minimum Teacher Salary MUST be improved upon or GOOD people will simply choose another 
profession. 
The minimum wage for all involved SUPPORT staff needs to be raised to a reasonable LIVING 
wage....which is and must be more than MINIMUM wage.
Retirement benefits MUST be addressed....the COLA cap AND the Insurance cost sharing 
percentages. 
The burn out facing our profession is not sustainable, but it IS real. 
The current desirability of the profession is not sustainable. 
We all must do better, and with your help and leadership, I know the state of Maine CAN and WILL do 
better, 
Thank you again for your time and your commitment to the people educating the next generation of 
our Maine workforce. 
Pamela Kinsey 
Fort Fairfield, Maine
