Janet T_ Mms Maine Department 0fHealth and Human Services 
Governor ,,f.~.; _ 
f; Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
"I- I ~ V 
11 State House Station 
» 
286 Water Street 
Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
" ' "":’“ Tel; (207) 287=8016; Fax (207)287-9058 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D. 
Commissioner 
Testimony of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 490, An Act to Designate the Department of Health and Human Services 
as the Implementing Department of the Lead-safe Housing Registry 
Hearing Date: April 12, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Karyn Butts and I am the manager of the Childhood 
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program Within the Department of Health and Human Services - 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention. I am here today to help introduce and speak in 
strong support of LD 490, An Act to Designate the Department of Health and Human Services as 
the Implementing Department of the Lead-safe Housing Registry. Thank you to Representative 
Craven for sponsoring this Department bill. 
LD 490 seeks to replace the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) with the 
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) as the agency responsible for implementing 
the registry of leased lead-safe residential dwellings. The following comments are offered for 
your consideration. 
Under Title 38, the DEP is charged with maintaining a registry of leased residential dwellings 
built before 1978 thatare lead-safe (38 M.R.S. § 1298). Under Title 22, funds from the Lead 
Poisoning Prevention Fund must be allocated for the implementation of the registry by DEP (22 
M.R.S. § 1322-E(3)(G)). In response to these mandates, DEP developed the registry as part ofa 
larger rental housing search tool, MaineHousingSearch.org, that was a collaboration of 
MaineHousing, DHHS, SmokeFree Housing Coalition of Maine, 211, and DEP. As of December 
31, 2022, the registry had 1,117 listings comprised of 12,810 units that included information 
about lead safety for those units. 
DEP supports the proposed changes and DHHS and DEP Worked collaboratively on this bill. Our 
departments have worked closely over many years to support the registry as both DEP and 
DHHS are involved in lead inspections and abatements in residential dwellings. DEP has 
oversight over licensure of lead professionals (e.g., inspectors and abatement contractors) and 
regulates how inspections and abatements are conducted. Under the Lead Poisoning Control Act 
(22 M.R.S. Chapter 252), DI-H-IS is responsible for inspecting residential dwellings for lead 
hazards in response to a case of lead poisoning or if lead-based substances are suspected ina 
dwelling. DHHS also orders abatement of lead hazards in rental dwellings. As a result, DHHS 
typically has more frequent interactions with property owners that have made their properties 
lead-safe though abatement. Further, DHHS funds community-based organizations in high-risk
areas and Works across the state to encourage rental property owners to proactively identify and 
address leadhazardsand potential lead hazards in order to prevent lead exposure among child 
tenants. Moving the registry to DHHS is a natural ﬁt with these activities as they present 
opportunities to efﬁciently invite rental property owners to make use of the registry. 
Should this bill pass, DEP will continue to have opportunities to provide input on the 
implementation of the registry. DEP and DHHS maintain a close working relationship on matters 
related to inspections for lead hazards and lead abatement in residential dwellings following 
DHHS orders to abate. In addition, DEP subject matter experts participate in meetings of an 
advisory board charged with reviewing and advising DHHS on allocations related to the Lead 
Poisoning Prevention Fund, which includes the registry (22 M.R.S. § 1322-E(3)(G)). Both of 
these relationships make DEP and DHHS well-positioned to continue our years-long partnership 
on the registry. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the committee, and I will be available to participate in the 
work session.
