Maine Medical 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President i Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO l Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
¢ SUPPORT Maine Physicians v ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine v PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Sen/ices 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director of Communications and Government Affairs 
DATE: Thursday, February 9, 2023 
OPPOSE — LQLQQ; Amend the Laws Governing Practicing Chiropractic Without a License 
The Maine Medical Association appreciates the opportunity to submit the following comments in 
opposition of LD 257. The bill as written amends 32 MRSA §454 (Practicing without license; 
fraudulent licenses) to include the term, “chiropractic physician ” as a violation of law under 
certain circumstances. We see the bill as unnecessary as the term is not permitted in Maine, 
whether a person is licensed or not. 
First, we recognize the role of chiropractors and agree that they are valuable members of the 
healthcare system, however, the term ‘physician ’ is well defined in state law and legislative 
intent. 
The common meaning of physician is medical doctor or surgeon. As used in Maine law, 
physician means a person licensed to practice medicine and surgery — only allopathic physicians 
(M.D.) and osteopathic physicians (D.O.). The term “chiropractic physician, ” implies that a doctor 
of chiropractic is licensed to practice beyond the scope of the statutory definition of chiropractic 
and misleading to the public. 
32 MRSA § 3269. Powers and duties of the board 
3. Licensing and standards. The power to license and to set standards of practice for 
physicians and surgeons practicing medicine in Maine. 
32 §327O-A. Assistants; delegating authority 
This chapter may not be construed as prohibiting a physician or surgeon from 
delegating to the physician's or surgeon's employees or support staff certain 
activities relating to medical care and treatment carried out by custom and usage 
when the activities are under the control of the physician or surgeon. 
32 MRSA § 2594-F. Physician assistants; scope of practice and agreement requirements 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
D. "Physician" means a person licensed as a physician under this chapter or chapter 
48. 
32 MRSA §327O. Licensure required 
Unless licensed by the board, an individual may not practice medicine or surgery ora 
branch of medicine or surgery or claim to be legally licensed to practice medicine 
or surgery or a branch of medicine or surgery within the State by diagnosing, 
relieving in any degree or curing, or professing or attempting to diagnose, relieve or cure 
a human disease, ailment, defect or complaint, whether physical or mental, or of physical 
and mental origin, by attendance or by advice, or by prescribing or furnishing a drug, 
medicine, appliance, manipulation, method or a therapeutic agent whatsoever or in any 
other manner unless othen/vise provided by statutes of this State. 
The practice of chiropractic is defined as follows: 
32 MRSA §451. Definitions 
1. Chiropractic. "Chiropractic" means the art and science of identiﬁcation and correction 
of subluxation and the accompanying physiological or mechanical abnormalities. The 
term subluxation, as utilized within the chiropractic health care system, meansa 
structural or functional impairment of an intact articular unit. "Chiropractic" includes 
chiropractic acupuncture. Chiropractic recognizes the inherent recuperative capability 
of the human body as it relates to the spinal column, musculo-skeletal and nervous 
system. 
2. Chirogractic doctors. "Chiropractic doctors” are health care providers functioning 
within their scope of practice as provided by this chapter. 
Proponents may argue that the word “physician ’ used in conjunction with the term “chiropractic ” 
is not misleading to the public. As emphasized in the above statute, practicing medicine and 
surgery is not within a chiropractors ’ scope and we argue the term and use of “chiropractic 
physician" indicates a license to practice medicine and surgery and the title “chiropractic doctor“ 
is clearly outlined in statute (32 MRSA 451). 
Several Maine statutes outside of the respective practice acts for allopathic physicians (M.D.) 
and osteopathic physicians (D.O), specifically define the term “physician ” yet do not include 
chiropractors: 
24 MRSA 2502 §3 under the Maine Health Security Act: "Physician" means any natural 
person authorized by law to practice medicine, osteopathic medicine or veterinary 
medicine within this State. 
32 MRSA 83 §’l8~A under the Maine Emergency Medical Sen/ices Act of 1982: 
"Physician" has the meaning set forth in Title 24, section 2502, subsection 3. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
18-C MRSA 5-802 §13 under the Uniform Health Care Decisions Act: "Physician" means 
an individual authorized to practice medicine under Title 32. 
22 MRSA 2140 §2 {J} under Patient-directed care at the end of life: "Physician" meansa 
doctor of medicine or osteopathy licensed to practice medicine in this State. 
34-B MRSA 11001 §1 (G) under Medical treatment of psychotic disorders: "Physician “ 
means an individual licensed to practice medicine. 
The content of Maine statutes listed above makes it clear that “physician ” can only mean persons 
licensed to practice medicine and surgery. Thus, the term physician has a specific meaning 
unless the Legislature othen/vise defines it. 
In addition, in Maine statutes “physician ” when used in conjunction with another word (e.g., 
physician assistants), there is an critical distinction between them and “chiropractic physician. ” 
Physician assistants are educated trained in medical care and participate in surgical care 
through that experience. Chiropractors do Q91 practice medicine and surgery. 
The fact that chiropractic means, “the identification and correction of subluxation and the 
accompanying physiological or mechanical abnormalities ” does not qualify a chiropractor asa 
physician. Since the practice of medicine and surgery is beyond the scope of chiropractic, the 
term “chiropractic physician" is contradictory and misleading. It is inconsistent to say that when 
used alone the term “physician ” mean a person licensed to practice medicine and surgery, but 
when used with another word means a person licensed to practice something other than 
medicine. 
We urge the committee to oppose the bill. Thank you for the opportunity to offer these comments. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
