l\/laine 
Osteo ethic ESSOCIEIUOO 
P. O. Box 315/ 29 Association Drive, Manchester, ME 0435] *1‘ 
Phone: 207-623-1101 
Fax: 207-623-4228 * www.mained0.0rg 
Testimony of the Maine Osteopathic Association 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
In Reference to: 
LD 160, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Practicing Chiropractic 
Without a License 
Public Hearing: Thursday, February 9, 2023 1:00 PM,Cross Building, Room 220 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Jodie Hermann, DO, FACOI, FACP, MBA. I am board certified in Internal Medicine and 
Neuromuscular Manual Medicine and I practice internal medicine and Osteopathic Manipulative 
Medicine at area hospitals, such as Maine Medical Center. I am pleased to provide testimony on behalf 
of my physician colleagues in opposition to LD 160. 
The Maine Osteopathic Association (MOA) is a professional organization representing approximately 
400 osteopathic physicians as well as more than 700 residents and students. Our mission is to “serve the 
Osteopathic profession of the State of Maine through a coordinated effort of professional education, 
advocacy and member services in order to ensure the availability of quality osteopathic health care to the 
people of this State.” 
Let me ﬁrst say that osteopathic physicians are committed to working with all of their colleagues in the 
health care community to deliver the highest quality care for the people of our state. We have great 
respect for each member of the health care delivery team and the distinct skills and knowledge they 
bring to the team. 
Our concern with this bill lies in the fact that the term “chiropractic physicians ” is an unlawful term for 
even chiropractic practitioners who are licensed. We feel that the term and use of “chiropractic 
physician ” indicates a license to practice medicine and surgery under the following statutory citations 
while the title chiropractic doctor is clearly outlined in statute (32 MRSA 451). 
In Maine, only licensed osteopathic (DOs), allopathic physicians (MDs) and veterinarians are allowed to 
call themselves “physicians ” lawfully. 
-24 MRSA 2502 §3 under the Maine Health Security Act: "Physician" means any natural person 
authorized by law to practice medicine, osteopathic medicine or veterinary medicine within this 
State. 
While it may seem trite, truth in advertising is important to quality patient care. Patients deserve to know 
who is treating them and what their qualiﬁcations and associated trainings are. Research conducted by 
the American Medical Association shows that more than 90% of patients believe that only licensed
l
medical doctors or doctors of osteopathic medicine should be able to use the title “physician ” . This is the 
term that represents the scope of practice, training and skills of an MD or a DO. 
Let’s take a quick look at requirements for an MD/DO or chiropractic license in Maine: 
Per Maine licensing laws (Title 32, Ch. 36), osteopathic physicians must complete a four year medical 
degree program (which includes two years of didactic study followed by two years of clinical rotations) 
and then must also complete an accredited 12 month internship and pass a qualifying specialty board 
examination. It should be noted that while only 1 year of postgraduate medical education is currently 
required to obtain a DO license in Maine, most complete a residency program of at least 3 years and 
some continue on to complete additional fellowship training. Allopathic medical licensure requires 24 
months of postgraduate training per Ch. 48. This process takes 7-8 years, after completing a 4 years 
undergraduate degree on average. 
According to Title 32 Ch. 9 chiropractors in Maine must complete a 4 year degree program ata 
chiropractic college. The National Board of Chiropractic Examiners indicates that three years of this 
program are didactic, ﬁnishing with one year of clinical internship under the supervision of an 
experienced chiropractor. An examination is also required of applicants, but no postgraduate clinical 
training is required for licensure. 
MDs and DOs upon successful application of licensure are lawfully allowed to practice medicine, 
including surgery. 
Chiropractic is deﬁned in statute as “the art and science of identification and correction of subluxation 
and the accompanying physiological or mechanical abnormalities. ” And chiropractors may use 
methodologies including “diagnostic, therapeutic, adjustive or manipulative techniques utilized within 
the chiropractic profession, excluding prescriptive medication or surgery. ” 
We believe these differences in training and practice parameters are best presented to patients in the 
titles used by practitioners to identify themselves. Chiropractors are not licensed to practice medicine. 
The term “chiropractic physician ” is an unlawful term license or not, so we are left unsure as to the 
reasons for this bill. 
While it may not be the intent, we are concerned that it may be a back door measure to allow use ofa 
term that is not only unlawful, but confusing for patients. 
It is for these reasons the MOA urges the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 160. 
Please do not hesitate to contact us at info§a1,mainedo.org if you have any questions. Thank you.
2
