'1‘ -‘ 
... 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE O4333—OOO2 ! HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
(207) 287-1440 
Laurel D. Libby MAINE RELAY 711 
-H2 Park Avenue 
Auburn. ME 0-1210 
L:1urel.l-ibb _\’1(:1legisluture.|n;|ine.go\" 
Residence: (207) 632-7619 
Testimony on 
L.D. 160, “An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Practzicizzg C.'Izz' ropract1' c Withouta 
License” 
Presented by 
Representative Laurel D. Libby 
District 90 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committee 
Thursday, February 9, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Ioint 
Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
I am State Representative Laurel D. Libby, and I proudly represent District 90, northern 
Auburn and Minot. It is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of introducing 
L.D. 160, “An Act to Amend the Laws G0ven1ingH'act1' c1' ng CY11' rop1'act1' c' Without a License. ” 
This issue was brought to my attention by the Maine Chiropractic Association (MCA). As the 
title indicates, this bill will amend current law governing practicing chiropractic without a 
license to prohibit an individual from using the title “chiropractic physician ” without having 
complied with the provisions of statute relating to the licensing of the practice of chiropractic. 
By including chiropractic physician in Maine statute, We will create uniformity with other 
State and federal designations, as 33 states allow the term chiropractic physician and the 
Department of Veteran Affairs, Social Security Act, and Medicare all federally recognize this 
tenn. 
This bill will not change the scope of practice or licensing qualiﬁcations for chiropractors. 
In that vein, I would offer for the committee ’ s consideration a friendly amendment to clarify 
how the term “chiropractic physician ” would be deﬁned: 
“chiropractic physician ” means a person licensed to treat human ailments without the use 
of drugs and without operative surgery. ” 
District 90 Auburn (Part) and Minot Over; Please 
Primed on recycled paper
I will defer to your analyst, Colleen McCarthy, to advise of the relevant statutory citations 
Where a definition may need to be included. 
Maine already recognizes osteopathic physicians, medical physicians, veterinary physicians, 
and, upon approval of this bill, chiropractic physicians. 
By updating the term chiropractic physician in L.D. 160, it is another way to move the State 
forward in line with the national trend with a collaborative approach. 
Thank you for considering this bill and amendment. I look forward to working with the 
Committee and am happy to answer any questions, but there are others here with more 
information on the issue.
