(AL, 
'i 
t » 
géﬁ ‘-.4!-\.li»- ii» ':_i- l- '<~_ i2i_ Ji~*i~%_; ’;_ i.I?|(; }*,.=w<; ‘»'.‘ :‘_l\.'e um 
February 9, 2023 
HCIFS Committee, Maine State Legislature 
LD 160 Testimony 
Madam Chairs and Members of the Committee, thank you for allowing this time. My name is 
Robert Reed, and l am the Executive Director for the Maine Chiropractic Association. We have 
brought forth this action at the request of our members. 
After speaking with our state licensing board (Geraldine Betts) and their consultation with the 
Maine Attorney General’s office (Nichole Sawyer) it was determined that under the current 
rules we could not use the term ”chiropractic physician" to describe our doctors, and use of 
that term would be considered ”practicing without a license; fraudulent |icense" . Adding the 
term ”chiropractic physician" will correct that omission. (Statute as currently defined is 
attached) and keep us in compliance with contracts our doctors may be asked to sign. 
Currently 33 states allow the use of the term "chiropractic physician" as well as the federal 
government (Social Security Act — Section 1861, Regulations No. 5 — 405.23 (a), (b)) the 
Veterans Administration, and many health insurers. Medicare statutes and items in the federal 
register refer to our doctors as "chiropractic physicians" often. In Maine, those chiropractic 
doctors who are practicing at a federally qualified health center, rural health center or the ”look 
alike" facilities are already referred to as chiropractic physicians by the grant programs and in 
scope of what can be offered and reimbursed at those facilities. Yet using that naming would be 
considered unlawful at this time. This places our doctors in a difficult situation when they are 
signing contracts written for a chiropractic physician, yet Maine statute does not allow use of 
that term. 
Black's Law Dictionary defines "physician" as follows — "A practitioner of medicine; a person 
duly authorized or licensed to treat disease without reference to any_particular school." 
Merriam—Webster defines "physician" as "a person trained in the art of healing" . Other 
definitions found are broader but focus on several aspects of being a physician - promoting,
maintaining, or restoring health through the study, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of 
disease, injury and physical and mental impairments. Each of these definitions clearly describes 
the chiropractic doctor. 
We are not asking for any change in scope of what a chiropractic doctor can provide, nor are we 
asking for the ability to prescribe prescriptions drugs or offer surgical services — this is merely 
clarification to match federal other state and insurer language. 
We support the sponsor's friendly amendment of a clear definition of chiropractic physician. 
”chiropractic physician" means a person licensed to treat human ailments without the use of 
drugs and without operative surgery.” 
Nothing in this rule shall be construed to authorize a chiropractic physician to prescribe 
prescription drugs or to offer surgical interventions. Should this change be considered contrary 
to other laws or rules currently enacted we leave it in your capable hands to determine if 
changes elsewhere should also be made. 
I welcome any questions you have at this time, however as I am not a Chiropractic Doctor, l 
may defer some clinical aspects to others who may testify after me. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Robert Reed, Executive Director 
Maine Chiropractic Association
Maine Statute to be reviewed: 
§454. Practicing without license; fraudulent licenses 
An individual who practices or attempts to practice or use the science or system of 
chiropractic in treating diseases of the human body; an individual who buys, sells or 
fraudulently obtains a diploma, license or record to practice chiropractic, or who aids or abets 
in that selling or fraudulent obtaining; an individual who practices chiropractic, under cover 
of a diploma, license or record to practice chiropractic, illegally obtained, or signed or issued 
unlawfully or under fraudulent representations; or an individual Who, after conviction of 
felony, practices chiropractic, or who uses any of the forms of letters, "Chiropractic," 
"Chiropractor," "Chiropractic Practitioner," "Doctor of Chiropractic," "D.C." or any other 
titles or letters, either alone or with qualifying words or phrases, under circumstances that 
induce the belief that the individual who uses those terms is engaged in the practice of 
chiropractic, without having complied with this chapter, is subject to the provisions of Title 
10, section 8003-C. This section may not be construed to prohibit a lawfully qualiﬁed 
chiropractor in any other state meeting with a licensed chiropractic practitioner in this State 
for consultation. [PL 2007, c. 402, Pt. H, §2 (AMD).]
