 
 
 
April  14th, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci, Senate Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human S ervices  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in SUPPORT of L.D 757: An Act to Expand Telemonitoring for MaineCare Patients   
 
Senator  Baldacci, Represen tative Meyer , and members of the committee on health and human services:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business 
organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. T he Maine State 
Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in  support of L.D. 757. We appreciate  the sponsor  Senator Guerin  for 
bringing this legislation forward.  
 
While th is is certainly a policy area that the C hamber t ypically does not  engage in - we felt this legislation  before you 
today  was worthy of doing so as we believe increasing access  to tele health  is important to economic development . We 
saw during the pandemic the critical role  telehealth playe d, and as the business community works to attract new talent to 
Maine , making sure people located in every corner of the state have access  is critica l. In a rural st ate like ours, it is 
important to attract people to the rural areas to fill the available  jobs – and telehealth  is an important factor .  
 
Health care costs and access  are something we always hear about from our members. L.D. 757 would enable businesses to 
offer residents in Maine better access to healthcare when otherwise this choice may not be available.  Businesses locate 
where their employees have access to healthcare , and if an area does not have reliable  healthcare, it makes it much more 
difficult to recruit a business.  As we work to g row ou r economy , attract new businesses, and create jobs, it is important 
that we give companies all the tools to  be successful  and to be sure that they have the most up to  date medical techn ology .  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to  provide written testimony. I will be happy to bring back additional information  if needed 
for the work session . We encourage you to give L.D . 757 an “ought to pass ” report.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
