PHILIPS 
April 14, 2023 
RE: PHILIPS TESTIMONY FOR LD 757 
Dear Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee: 
On behalf of Philips, I submit testimony supporting LD 757, which would require MaineCare 
coverage of telemonitoring for patients if certain conditions are met. 
As you may know, Philips is a health technology company focused on improving lives. The 
company is a leader in ultrasound, patient monitoring, maternal health technology, ventilators, 
and electric toothbrushes, among others. In addition, Philips has been an industry leader in 
transforming telehealth over the last ﬁfteen years, including launching a telemonitoring program 
for patients. We applaud any state legislative effort to expand telemonitoring. 
Telemonitoring is an important patient care solution: 
Telemonitoring (often known as remote patient monitoring (RPM)) tracks patients ‘ vitals in their 
homes (like blood pressure cuffs, connected scales, pulse oximeters, and glucometers) to help 
doctors better monitor patients with chronic illnesses in the home or monitor patients recovering 
from acute conditions when discharged to the home. Through these tools, providers can better 
understand a patient's response to treatment, track improvements or be warned sooner of 
deteriorations to intervene and minimize exacerbations. Telemonitoring helps patients with 
diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), congestive heart failure, high blood 
pressure, high-risk pregnancies, among many other conditions. 
Telemonitoringprecedent already exists in Maine: 
Maine Medicaid ‘s Statute only reimburses home health agencies for offering telemonitoring. 
Other providers are ineligible; therefore, primary care physicians, cardiologists, obstetricians, 
endocrinologists or other providers who often prescribe telemonitoring will not receive Medicaid 
reimbursement for offering telemonitoring. On the other hand, Maine’s health insurance law 
(Title 24, Chapter 56-A, §43 lo) requires commercial health insurance carriers to cover 
“medically necessary health care services through telehealth, ” which includes “telemonitoring. ” 
No provider limitations exist for Mainers who have commercial insurance. Therefore, inequities 
exist between Mainers who have commercial health insurance and those on MaineCare. 
Other states require Medicaid coverage of telemonitoring; 
By enacting LD 757, Maine will join a chorus of other states in expanding telemonitoring to their 
citizens. According to the Center for Connected Health Policv’s Fall 2022 Report, 34 state 
Medicaid programs cover telemonitoring in some capacity. While Maine is listed as one of these 
34 states, as mentioned above, the coverage is limited to only home health agencies. On the other 
hand, most State Medicaid programs don’t have these limitations; any patient in need could have 
access to telemonitoring if prescribed by their doctor. 
Telemonitoring leads to better clinical outcomes and cost savings: 
Here are a few studies demonstrating the value of telemonitoring:
0 The Dept. of Veterans Affairs reported in 20l 8 that out of 136,000 patients enrolled in its 
RPM program, there was a 53% decrease in bed days and a 33% reduction in hospital 
admissions. This led the VA to offering telemonitoring to all veterans in need. 
0 A 2017 study examined how continuous data collection would help inﬂuence hospital 
readmission rates for approximately 890 COPD patients. The study resulted in an 80% 
reduction in acute 30-day readmissions and a 70% reduction in total all-cause acute care 
events driving savings to the hospital. 
0 A 2015 study by Spectrum Health analyzed heart failure patients post-discharge. Spectrum 
found the RPM program reduced hospital admissions by more than 50%, decreased length of 
stay by almost 70%, and lowered the average daily charge per patient by more than 55%. 
0 A 2014 study by the VA analyzed 4,999 patients with multiple chronic conditions using 
RPM programs. The result: lowered mortality rates compared to patients outside of the 
program by more than 40% over 12 months. Several healthcare cost drivers (e.g., E.R. visits 
and admissions) had sizable declines in the remote monitoring group. 
0 A 2005 study looked at how telemonitoring would help approximately 445 veterans with 
diabetes who had two or more hospitalizations or emergency room visits. Patient 
hospitalizations were reduced by 50%, emergency room visits were reduced by 1 1%, and 
average bed days were reduced by three days. 
Other clinicians want to use telemonitoring: The American Medical Association*s policy 
guidance highlights RPM as a key telehealth tool to ensuring uninterrupted care for 100 million 
Americans with chronic conditions. In addition, from J anuaiy 2019 to November 2022, this 
study showed how RPM claim volume has increased by l,294% with intemal medicine, 
cardiologists, and family practice physicians prescribing it the most. In addition, for those 
interested in maternal health, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists issueda 
statement expressing the importance of telemonitoring for “pregnant and postpartum women.” 
For these reasons, Philips urges the committee to pass LD 757 to provide access to 
telemonitoring for any Maine citizen on MaineCare. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this important issue. Please let me know if 
you have any questions or need more information. 
Sincerely, 
W" 
Evan Hoffman 
Director of State and Local Government Relations 
Philips
