  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Commi ttee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laurie Belden, a resident 
of Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of 
Maine (Alliance).  The Alliance is a network of home health care, hospice, home 
care and personal care provi ders across our State delivering in -home care to older 
adults and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to stay in their home 
and community.  
I’m here today to testify in support of LD 757, An Act to Expand Telemonitoring 
for MaineCare Patients . 
This bill defines the telemonitoring requirements as:  
a) intended to collect the patient's health -related data, including, but not limited 
to, pulse and blood pressure readings, that assist a provider  in monitoring 
and assessing the patient's health status;  
b) medically necessary for the patient;  
c) the patient is cognitively and physically capable of operating the 
telemonitoring device or the patient has a caregiver willing and able to assist 
with the telemonitoring device; and  
d) the patient's residence is suitab le for telemonitoring.  
 
The ability to monitor certain aspects of a patient's health from their own home 
has become an essential tool employed by home health care providers in Maine 
and across the country . Remote patient monitoring lets caregivers  manage acute 
and chronic conditions  while cutting  down on travel costs and infection risk  (for 
both the patient and the caregiver) . Members of the Alliance report  that when 
integrated into a comprehensive approach to patient care, remote monitoring of 
chronic conditions and short -term illnesses  improves patient outcomes and 
quality of care for those choosing to receive care in the home.  
 
Telemonitoring enables patients’ clinical stats (such as heart rate, blood pressure, 
oxygen saturation, and weight)  to be mon itored more frequently and 
consistently. Home health providers would be able to intervene quickly at even 
the slightest change in a patient's vital signs or other monitored statistics to avoid 
an emergency room visit or hospitalization.  
  Board of Directors  
 
President  
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President  
Daryl Cady  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Treasurer  
RJ Gagnon  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Secretary  
Laurie Bourgoin  
Home Hope & Healing  
 
 
Members  
Ken Albert  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Patricia Aprile  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Kyra Chamberlain  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Elaine Collins  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Chris Costello  
CHANS Home Health& Hospice  
 
Zetta Fogg  
McKesson Medical -Surgical  
 
Lisa Harvey -McPherson  
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice  
 
Adam LaMonica  
Maxim Healthcare Services  
 
Amy McVety  
Mount Desert Nursing Association  
 
Greg Pizzo  
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice  
 
Amy Shawley  
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice  
 Testimony in Support of  
LD 757, An Act to Expand Telemonitoring for MaineCare Patients  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
 
  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 While some patients will need in -person testing, diagnostics, or monitoring , there are many ways that remote 
patient monitoring can help with chronic conditions and short -term illness.1 
 
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) reports remote monitoring benefits to include : 
 
 Reduced hospitalizations  
 Shorter hospital stays if the patient can be discharged with a remote monitoring device to use at 
home  
 Fewer visits to the emergency room  
 Better health outcomes for patients in rural areas  
 Better preventative management for chronic conditions  
Hospitals, nursing homes, and home -based care are like a 3 -legged stool in the state's healthcare landscape. 
Caring for Mainers in the home is essential to relieving the stress on facilities by keeping patients out of acut e 
and long -term care settings. One way to significantly reduce hospitalizations is to allow  telemonitoring when 
appropriate for MaineCare beneficiaries , which will to improve symptom management, engage patients in 
their own plan of care, and keep patients in the comfort of their own home.   
Expanding telemontoring  for MaineCare patients  will help home health agencies meet today's workforce 
challenges , improve care delivery, and save MaineCare resources through more effective, efficient access and 
delivery of services.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of this important legislation to ensure the safety 
and wellbeing of our fellow Mainers.  
 
Laurie Be lden , Executive Director  
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
                                                 
1 https://telehealth.hhs.gov/  
