'
a _y.1 
"5 A/''
- . . / If 
‘Q 51:11 ll
‘ 
> la’! 
Stacey K. Guerin THE MAINE SENATE ' 
3 State House Station 
Senator, District 4 A 
131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333
» 
. 
Testimony of Senator Stacey Guerin 
Presenting L.D. 757, An Act to Expand Telemonitoring for MaineCare Patients 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services5
' 
_ Friday, April 14, 2023' 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee: I am Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent District 4, which includes all of 
Piscataquis County and ll commtmities in Penobscot County. Thank you for allowing me to 
present 757, An Act to Expand T elem0nit0ring- for .M_a _ine_Care Patients. 
This bill aims to address inequities between individuals with MaineCare and those who have 
private or ‘commercial health insurance. Currently, MaineCare will only reimburse home health 
care agencies for telemonitoring. However, under Title 24, Chapter 56-A it states that “a carrier 
shall provide coverage for any medically necessary health care service delivered through 
telehealth. . .” 
Studies have shown that telehealth increases patient access to health care, can lower costs and 
result in better outcomes as speciﬁc conditions like Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD) and high blood pressure can be more closely monitored. 
Over the last decade, telehealth has become a much more common practice in the realm of 
healthcare and I believe this is in large part to its efﬁciency and accessibility. According toa 
McKinsey & Company article, telehealth utilization for ofﬁce visits and outpatient care was 78 
times higher in April 2020 compared to February 2020. That same article showed that as of July 
2021, telehealth utilization had stabilized ‘ at 3 8 percent higher than pre-pandemic levels.‘ 
Telehealth provides for the safe and accessible delivery of healthcare as it minimizes wait times 
to see a doctor and allows people to stay in their home - or even place of work - rather than 
traveling for ofﬁce visits. While telehealth levels greatly increased during the pandemic, I 
believe it is here to stay and will continue to be more widely utilized, particularly given the 
American Medical Association ’s policy guidance that highlights telehealth as a key tool to 
ensuring care for “I00 million Americans with chronic conditions. ”2 
Telehealth can also lower costs and result in better patient outcomes because of more immediate 
care and the technology to track chronic symptoms at home. 
“Telehealth: A Post-COVID-l9 Reality?, ” McKinsey & Company, July 9, 2021 
2 “AMA Telehealth Quick Guide,” American Medical Association, November 5, 2021 
State House: (207) 287-1505 * Far: (207) 287-1527 * T0llFree." 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Stacey. Guerin@legislature.mainegov * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
According to a Veterans Health Administration Fact Sheet from 2019, of the 136,000 patients 
enrolled in their 2018 Remote Patient Monitoring program, there was “a 53% decrease in VA 
bed days of care and a 33% decrease in VA hospital admissions. ” With regard to mental health, 
“services provided via synchronous TeleMental Health reduced Acute Psychiatric VA bed days 
of care by 40% and VA hospital admissions by 34%.” 3 Due to these positive results, the VA 
began offering telemonitoring to all veterans in need. 
An article titled, Can Telemedicine Be Both Cost-Effective and High Quality? stated “in a study 
reported by the University of Massachusetts, it was found that telehealth reduced ICU stays by 
30 percent. It helped to dramatically reduce healthcare costs — fewer doctors, more room in 
ICUs, less time spent inpatient, and better long-term outcomes. ”4 
As mentioned, this bill aims to address inequities between individuals who have MaineCare and 
those with private or commercial health insurance by expanding the delivery of telehealth 
services to a greater number of MaineCare patients. It also provides for coverage of telehealth 
services used to collect and monitor a patient’s health status. By allowing for greater 
accessibility to monitoring a patient’s health, we canreduce in-hospital stays as was displayed in 
the case of VHA’s Remote Patient Monitoring program. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
3 “VHA Telehealth Services Fact Sheet,” U.S. Department of Veterans Aﬂairs, 2019 
"' 
“Can Telemedicine Be Both Cost-effective and High Quality?, ” pr0gn0ClS, November 30, 2021
