 
ATA ACTION  
901 N. Glebe Road, Ste 850 | Arlington, VA 22203  
Info@ataaction.org  
 
April 12, 2023 
 
The Honorable Joe Baldacci  
Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature  
House Majority Office  
P.O. Box 1423,  
Bangor, ME 04402  
 
The Honorable Michele Meyer  
Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature  
58 Odiorne Lane  
Eliot, ME 03903  
 
RE: ATA  ACTION  SUPPORT FOR  LEGISLATIVE DOCUMENT  757 
 
Dear Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services,   
 
On behalf of ATA Action, I am writing you to express our support for Legislative Document 757 
regarding telemonitoring services.  
 
ATA Action, the American Telemedicine Asso ciation’s affiliated trade association focused on 
advocacy, advances policy to ensure all individuals have permanent access to telehealth services 
across the care continuum. ATA Action supports the enactment of state and federal telehealth 
coverage and fai r payment policies to secure telehealth access for all Americans, including those 
in rural and underserved communities. ATA Action recognizes that telehealth and virtual care 
have the potential to truly transform the health care delivery system – by improv ing patient 
outcomes, enhancing safety and effectiveness of care, addressing health disparities, and reducing 
costs – if only allowed to flourish.  
 
ATA Action is appreciative of the legislature’s efforts to expand MaineCare patients’ access to 
telemonitoring services by requiring MaineCare coverage for telemonitoring services. This will 
make it much easier for MaineCare patients to access high -quality  telemonitoring care, improve 
patient outcomes and make it easier for providers to deliver the care that patients need and want.  
 
Additionally, increasing patient access to home telemonitoring services will help prevent and 
address emergency situations wh ich could require patients to contact their healthcare provider for 
assistance or guidance, facilitating greater patient safety. Further empowering  providers to 
monitor patients remotely will make it substantially easier for patients – especially those in rural 
and underserved communities – to receive the services they need. Instead of travelling long 
 
ATA ACTION  
901 N. Glebe Road, Ste 850 | Arlington, VA 22203  
Info@ataaction.org  
distances to see their preferred providers, providing coverage for telemonitoring services will 
make it easier for MaineCare care patients to get high -quality , affordable care from the comfort 
of their own homes, and health care providers will be more easily able to monitor patient 
conditions.  
 
Thank you for your support for telehealth . We encourage you and your colleagues to pass 
Legislative Document 757 in the interest of expanding Maine Care  patients’ access to affordable, 
high-quality care. Please let us know if there is anything that we can do to assist you in your 
efforts to adopt practical telehealth  policy in  Maine . If you have any questions or would like to 
engage in additional discussio n regarding the tele health  industry’s perspective, please contact me 
at kzebley@ataaction.org . 
 
Kind regards,  
 
 
 
 
Kyle Zebley  
Executive Director  
ATA Action  
