Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1151
Via online portal
April 3, 2023
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair
Representative Anne Perry, Chair
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee
RE: Testimony on LD 1151, Allowing Pharmacy Technicians to Administer 
Vaccines—OPPOSE
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and 
Financial Services Committee:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse, President, Maine State Nurses 
Association, and Vice-President, National Nurses United. I am providing testimony 
today opposing LD 1151 on behalf of Maine State Nurses Association/National 
Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 Maine registered nurses. In our 
view,  the amendments to the Pharmacy Practice Act would endanger patients. For the
reasons discussed below, we ask for your “NO” vote on LD 1151.
LD 1151’s amendments to the Pharmacy Practice Act to the LD 1151 include:
•Eliminating important safeguards that limit when a pharmacist or pharmacy 
technician can administer vaccines. 
•Allowing pharmacists and pharmacy technicians to vaccinate children as young as 
3 years old.
oThis not only endangers very young children but would also allow them to miss 
regular wellness visits with their pediatrician or other primary care provider.
oThe direct supervision requirement allows a pharmacy technician to be at a remote 
location with only audio-video access and to administer vaccines during the 
supervising pharmacist’s absence from the workplace for meals or breaks.
•Elimination of Vaccine Safeguards
LD 1151 eliminates important safeguards and grants far too much discretion to 
pharmacists and pharmacy technicians in administering vaccines. LD 1151 would 
allow pharmacists and pharmacy technicians to administer vaccines:
owithout a treatment protocol or standing order from a health care provide, for 
vaccines recommended by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) and 
owithout a valid prescription by a patient’s primary care provider that specifically 
states that the vaccine is medically necessary, for vaccines outside CDC 
recommendation guidelines. 
Current rules for administering vaccines require detailed protocols, which would no 
longer be required under LD 1151. Under current rules, protocols must include:
othe  maximum permitted dose,
othe route of administration (e.g., by mouth or intramuscular injection),
oobservation standards to determine whether the person receiving a vaccine has an 
adverse reaction, including how long the patient should wait before leaving the 
facility,
oprocedures for administering epinephrine, diphenhydramine, or both, to a person 
who has an adverse reaction to a vaccine, including guidelines for when to contact 
local emergency services or other follow-up health care providers, and
onotification procedures, including that a vaccine has been administered to a 
particular person and any adverse reactions. 
•Pharmacy Technicians
Pharmacy technicians are not sufficiently qualified to identify adverse reactions to 
vaccines nor to respond to them, even if they meet the Board of Pharmacy’s minimal 
requirements for registration to administer vaccines. There are no standardized 
training requirements for becoming a registered pharmacy technician. Current rules 
require: “A pharmacy that employs a pharmacy technician shall develop or deploy a 
training program for pharmacy technicians employed at that pharmacy”.  The 
technical requirements of the training program are limited to including “specific 
instruction relating to the limited scope of practice of a pharmacy technician and shall
clearly delineate functions that may only be performed by a pharmacist and may not 
be performed by a pharmacy technician”.  The Board of Pharmacy requires only six 
hours of approved training and a copy of current Cardiopulmonary Life Support 
certification that can be met by an online program in basic cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. 
MSNA/NNU does not believe that these requirements are sufficient to prepare a 
pharmacy technician to administer vaccines. MSNA/NNU is not alone in this view. A 
recent national survey found that only 24% of pharmacists agreed with technician 
administration of vaccines.  It is vital to recognize that vaccine administration, no 
matter how routine, is a complex process that involves much more than the physical 
act of injection or other administration method. Importantly, patient assessments and 
education are central to this process. An overwhelming majority of pharmacists (71%)
do not believe that their patients’ complete immunization needs were assessed at 
every patient encounter.  In sum, registered pharmacy technicians lack the clinical 
education, professional judgment, and patient advocacy skills necessary to safely 
administer of vaccines.
To see the potential errors that could harm patients, one need only consider Covid-19 
vaccines. Covid-19 vaccines present numerous possibilities for error, in addition to 
the possibility of a severe allergic reaction. The Food and Drug Administration and 
the Centers for Disease Control’s (CDC) regular changes to their recommendations 
regarding COVID-19 therapeutics and vaccines further complicates matters.  
Currently, the CDC lists eight different types of administration errors or deviations: 
site/route, age, product and dosage, storage and handling, time intervals, mixed 
primary series, diluent (Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine formulation only 
[orange cap and maroon cap]), and diluent (Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 formulation 
that should not be mixed with diluent, i.e., gray cap).  Each of these eight types has its
own list of specific errors and deviations as well as interim recommendations for 
ameliorating them. However, the errors or deviations can only be ameliorated if they 
are identified. A significant number of pharmacists report that it is challenging to 
supervise technician-administered immunizations while performing other duties as a 
pharmacist. 
COVID-19 vaccination is extremely complicated. There are currently four different 
COVID-19 vaccines, each of which has different age-based requirements including 
dosages and time intervals between dosages. Consider the three COVID-19 vaccines 
for children and teens aged 6 months–17 years: Pfizer-BioNTech uses three age 
groups, Moderna two, and Novavax is available only for ages 12–17.  
Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, Novavax, and Johnson & Johnson each have vaccines for
adults aged 18 and older with varying time intervals for the primary series.  For 
Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna bivalent boosters, both the child and adult vaccines 
have differing recommendations on whether mixing and matching is acceptable based
on the manufacturer of the primary vaccine series. 
In some cases, the vaccine manufacturer’s packaging increases the likelihood of error.
The Institute for Safe Medical Practices analyzed errors in children’s COVID-19 
vaccinations and found the following:
Some errors are due to vial or syringe mix-ups. The label on the pediatric formulation 
states: “Age 5y to < 12y” … , but this is not as prominent as instructions to “DILUTE
PRIOR TO USE” and could be missed. Surprisingly, only the injection volume is 
listed on Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine labels. The dose in mcg is not listed, 
which would have been helpful in differentiating this product from the 30 mcg/0.3 
mL formulation for patients 12 years and older. The 30 mcg/0.3 mL adult formulation
vial has a purple cap, while the 10 mcg/0.2 mL pediatric formulation has an orange 
cap. While different color caps might help prevent some mix-ups, once the cap is 
removed and discarded, doses may be prepared one at a time rather than all at once, 
which will render the cap color irrelevant. Also, it is unlikely that the vial will 
accompany prepared syringes, so the vial label cannot be verified by those 
administering the vaccine or parents/patients receiving the vaccine. 
Finally, vaccination of patients 3 years of age and older without a valid prescription 
by a licensed health care provider may allow young patients to forego important 
well-child visits.
For the above reasons, we oppose LD 1151 (Ingwersen) and ask for your “NO” vote.
Sincerely,
 
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United
