45 Melville Street, SuiteI 
ﬁsgcl-‘$5 h Augusta, ME 04330 
M N E Phone: 207.6231 149 
Voice of Maine Retail www.retailmaine.org
V 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Members of the Health Coverage Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
RE: Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 1151, An Act to Decrease Barriers for Preventive Health 
Services by Allowing Pharmacy Technicians to Administer Vaccines AS AMENDED (4/5/23) 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine.I 
am a resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes, including chain and independent pharmacies. We are here today to testify in 
support of LD 1151. Thank you to Senator lngwersen for submitting this legislation, and thank 
you to the Maine Medical Association, the Maine Pharmacy Association, and the Maine Board 
of Pharmacy for providing valuable input into the amended bill you have before you. Much like 
you saw on LD 351 yesterday, this bill is the product of collaboration of key stakeholder all with 
the shared goal of making vaccinations more readily available to consumers. 
The health care system was tested like never before during the COVID pandemic, but one of the 
silver linings of the pandemic, if there actually is one, is the recognition that pharmacists and 
pharmacy technicians play a key role in the administration of vaccines. This bill will make is 
easier for consumers to get their vaccines administered at a pharmacy if they choose. 
Pharmacies are often more accessible, and easier to schedule than other options. In many 
cases, your primary care physician will direct you to a pharmacy for your vaccine. 
In the last year, I have received by Moderna COVID booster, flu shot and my first Shingles 
vaccine at a pharmacy. In most cases, I was able to schedule it online and within a couple of 
days that worked with my schedule. However, it has always been a challenge to schedule my 
teenager to do the same thing. This amended bill removes some of the existing barriers to
make it easier for more people to have better access. That's the goal of this bill, and I hope the 
committee will give it your unanimous support. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Picard, CAE, 
President and CEO
