Elena Gino
Island Falls
LD 1151
Dear Committee
     As Maine residents, we are opposing this bill due to the following:
-this bill trivializes very real vaccine risks and serious reactions by allowing a 
pharmacy technician, perhaps with only a GED education, to administer possibly 
life-threatening vaccines to adults and children as young as 3 years old
-Pharmacy technicians are not anywhere close to being health care providers and 
shouldn’t be giving vaccines, especially to young children. Also it undermines the 
doctor patient relationship and removes critical health history screenings prior to 
vaccination. Neither pharmacists nor less qualified pharmacy technicians have the 
necessary medical history of an infant or child or the time to prescreen for 
contraindications based on a child’s personal and family history and unique heath 
needs prior to vaccination. Pharmacists nor pharmacy technicians do not have enough 
training about all the vaccines, risks, prescreening, contraindications, emergency 
interventions for reactions, reporting reactions to Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting 
System (VAERS), and advising parents and patients about the statute of limitations 
and instructions for filing a claim with the National Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program.
-Vaccines, just like all pharmaceutical products, can cause injury and death in some 
people. As of January 1, 2023, The United States Government has paid out more than 
$4.9 billion dollars to vaccine victims through the National Vaccine Injury 
Compensation Program (VICP). As of 1/13/2023, there were 43,431 deaths and 
2,407,011 adverse events reported to the US government's Vaccine Adverse Events 
Reporting System. Clearly, there are serious dangers associated with vaccines that 
should not be ignored!  Simply increasing those who can administer them won’t make
them safer, but will put more people in danger.
-Most pharmacies and grocery stores don’t have lifesaving defibrillators like they 
do in doctors’ offices when life-threatening reactions to vaccines occur. Will 
pharmacists or pharmacy technicians have the equipment and training to be able to 
tell the difference between cardiac arrest, anaphylaxis, fainting, and act accordingly to
save the lives of children who react at the time of or shortly after vaccination? 
-Clearly, pharmacy groups will support this bill, but it presents a serious conflict of 
interest because of the financial benefits they will receive if this bill passes. 
America’s biopharmaceutical research companies are developing 258 vaccines. The 
U.S. Vaccine Market alone was $36.45 billion in 2018, and is expected to reach $58.4
billion by 2024 and pharmacies stand to increase their profits substantially by 
allowing pharmacy technicians to put those shots into customers. But would this 
really benefit people, if potentially deadly substance will be administered to them by 
the person who is not train to neither recognize adverse affects not provide proper 
help in case of them? 
-This conflict of interest is compounded by the fact that neither Pharmacists nor 
pharmacy technicians will have liability for the injuries and deaths caused by the 
vaccines they administer to children. Vaccines administrators are shielded from 
liability for vaccine injuries and deaths through the combination of the law passed by 
Congress in 1986 establishing the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program 
and the 2011 Supreme Court Decision BRUESEWITZ ET AL. v. WYETH LLC, 
FKA WYETH, INC., ET AL. 
Therefore, Dear Committee, whom this bill will really benefit: residents of Maine, 
your constituents, or pharmaceutical companies, by getting more “points of 
distribution” of their product? Please, put people first not the profits! One day we all 
will answer for what we have done in this life, May God help you to make a right 
choice of opposing this bill for the sake and well-being of the people. 

