HU S SCHOOL CF 
§__" I Y 5 R 5 I "5Y 
April 6 , 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair 
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
RE: LD1151 An Act to Decrease Barriers for Preventive Health Services by Allowing Pharmacy 
Technicians to Administer Vaccines 
Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Erin Aucoin and I am a ﬁfth—year pharmacy student at Husson University. I am a resident of 
Brewer, and I have been immunizing at a community pharmacy for the past two years. 
A major concern that was previously raised is the risk of errors made by pharmacy professionals when 
administering vaccines. I am here today to clear up any misconceptions regarding rates of errors made in 
vaccine administration in a pharmacy setting compared to more traditional settings. To set a baseline, I am 
defining a vaccine error as any reported event involving the administration of the incorrect vaccine or an 
expired vaccine, administration of an extra dose or an incorrect dose, vaccines given to the wrong patient, and 
other less frequent errors involving inappropriate vaccine administration. 
Between June of 2020 and December of 2021, as documented by the Institute for Safe Medical Practices, there 
were 1,440 nationally reported non-COVID vaccine related errors. Out of these errors, only nine percent, or 
130, of these errors occurred in community pharmacies, compared to doctor’s oﬂices and medical clinics which 
were responsible for sixty-nine percent, or 994, of these errors. The remainder of the errors were reported from 
other settings such as hospitals and school based health-clinics. 
In terms of healthcare professionals responsible for vaccination errors, forty-two percent of events involved 
registered nurses and nurse practitioners, thirty-four percent of events involved medical assistants, fourteen 
percent involved physicians and physicians assistants, with the remaining fourteen percent being related to 
pharmacy personnel. It is especially noteworthy that these statistics come from the height of the COVID 
pandemic, which resulted in a substantial increase in the number of vaccines administered in community 
pharmacies. In 2020, community pharmacies experienced an estimated thirty to forty percent increase in the 
number of vaccines administered. Of the most commonly administered vaccines, the inﬂuenza, COVID-19, and 
shingles vaccines, sixty percent were administered in a community pharmacy setting, as reported by the Global 
Healthy Living Foundation. Looking only at COVID vaccinations, ninety percent were administered ata 
community pharmacy. 
It is clear from these statistics that administration of vaccines in a community pharmacy setting by a trained 
pharmacist or pharmacy technician does not pose any increased risk of error in vaccine administration. In fact, 
pharmacy professionals had some of the lowest rates of vaccine-related errors despite administering a
HU S SCHOOL O1? 
1.? 1 Y: E R s IT Y PHARMACY 
substantial, and ever increasing, percentage of vaccines. All members of the healthcare team are vital in patient 
care, and these statistics show that pharmacies can work alongside our healthcare colleagues and successfully 
assist in the safe administration of immunizations. 
Husson University ’s School of Pharmacy is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this 
legislation. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Most sincerely, 
/’ ’ /7 ' I( 
.4 pl/49/~\W Erin Aucoin, 2024 Doctor of Pharmacy Candidate 
Husson University
