SCHOOL or 
ti 2»: I v ER 1 T Y PHARMACY 
April 6, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair 
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
RE: LD1151 An Act to Decrease Barriers for Preventive Health Services by Allowing Pharmacy 
Technicians to Administer Vaccines 
Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Dr. Kelsie Snow, PharmD and I am a resident of Carmel, Maine. I am a licensed pharmacist 
employed by Husson University in the pharmacy program where I teach a variety of topics. I am also one of the 
very few that can teach both immunization training courses. Furthermore, I am an instructor for both the 
American Heart Association and the Red Cross’ CPR courses. 
I previously had the privilege of speaking to you in support of LD899. As a reminder, the offer to take the 
immunization training courses still stands. I would like to thank you for your thoughtful consideration of these 
two immunization bills as they speak to the importance of protecting the public by expanding access to care for 
Mainers. I would like to start by providing my enthusiastic support of today’s amendment to LD1151. 
It is absolutely my opinion as a licensed pharmacist in this state that this amendment is a rational, necessary 
expansion to pharmacy-based immunization authority to protect the health of Maine people. Obtaining a 
prescription for patients aged 17 and younger makes sense while still increasing access to care. Allowing adult 
patients to receive immunizations without a prescription, as long as they are endorsed by the Centers for 
Disease Control (CDC), is also an enormous step in a positive direction. When I was running my pharmacies I 
routinely had to turn people away from needed immunizations because a prescription had not yet been received 
for them, and I am glad to see that this amended bill rectiﬁes that. Something that I am appreciative of is thata 
prescription will be required when vaccinating outside the recommended immunization schedules ~ not because 
we cannot make these determinations, but that the current set up in pharmacies often leaves us with incomplete 
information and the responsibility will be shared among healthcare team members. 
I am in no way personally excited about the eventuality of injecting a three-year-old with a needle, and I am 
quite familiar with this age group as a proud aunt. This is, however, a burden that I am willing to take ona 
thousand times over as I know that this is a crucial step in protecting Maine’s children against 
vaccine-preventable illnesses. 
You have already heard testimony in support of expanding pharmacy-based immunizations. I would like to 
expand upon that while addressing a previous concern: how we can ensure that pharmacists remain up to date 
with the never-ending advancements in healthcare. Let me assure you, this is a burden that pharmacists gladly 
take on. Immunizations are not the only component of healthcare to advance rapidly; the
S SCHOOL OF 
tr I“? i: R 1 T Y PHARMACY 
same is true for most areas of pharmacotherapy. There are processes in place to ensure that we stay up to date 
and it is literally part of the drug utilization review (DUR) and professional conduct standards, which is part of 
preparing every prescription for every patient, irmnunizations included. It is our professional responsibility to 
use our informed clinical judgment to ensure the right patient is receiving the medication, at the right dose, at 
the right time, for the right reason, administered in the right way, and at an accessible price. 
You have heard today why expanding pharmacy-based immunizations makes sense from a public health 
standpoint, how we stay up to date, and that evidence from the Institute of Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) 
has found pharmacy —based immunizations to have the lowest rates of errors during the pandemic. We are asking 
for your support as we continue to strive to optimize the health of Mainers by can'ying this amended bill 
forward. 
Husson University ’s School of Pharmacy is happy to answer any questions and work with the Committee on 
this legislation. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Most sincerely, 
l/WW 
Kelsie Snow, PharmD 
Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice 
Husson University 
1 College Circle 
Bangor, ME 04401 
207.404.5608
