SCI-l()()L ()1? 
PHARMACY 
April 6, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair 
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
RE: LD1151 An Act to Decrease Barriers for Preventive Health Services by Allowing Pharmacy Technicians to Administer 
Vaccines 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Peny and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Olivia Moody, and I am a resident of Winslow, Maine, a licensed pharmacy intern at Savage’s Drug and 5th year Doctor 
of Pharmacy student at Husson University School of Pharmacy. I have been working in pharmacy for 6 years as a phannacy technician 
and now a pharmacy intern. On behalf of Husson University, my peers, and the rural communities of Maine, I am submitting this 
testimony in support of LD 1151. 
I recently had the privilege to speak with you regarding LD 899, which I still feel is only increasing in importance. Today, however, I 
am here to speak with you on the importance of LD 1151, and how my support of both bills can provide better access to healthcare and 
vaccinations for the Maine population. 
Administering vaccines has become a vital part of the practice of pharmacy over the last ten years, something that has been clearly 
illustrated throughout the pandemic. Pharmacists have become the cornerstone for the vaccine community during COVID-19 and 
these services have proven themselves crucial to supporting public health throughout the state. Not only are pharmacists and pharmacy 
staff appropriately trained, but they are required to fulﬁll continuing education credits on an annual basis in order to renew their 
licenses and keep their jobs. Pharmacists are required by Maine State Law to complete 15 hours of continuing education credits per 
calendar year, and at least two of ﬂrose hours must be inboard-approved courses on drug administration. 
It is no secret that working in a pharmacy has a number of demands and can be very challenging. Remaining up to date is a top priority 
of pharmacy, which is why it is literally built into the prescription dispensing process as well as the board of pharmacy ’s standards of 
professional conduct. All of the work in a pharmacy is required to be carried out under the direct supervision of a pharmacist, and an 
individual licensee must be the pharmacist in charge (PIC), accepting legal responsibility of the pharmacy and all work completed 
within it. The pharmacist also has to physically review each prescription order before it can be provided to the patient and the 
pharmacist is responsible for all work completed by the pharmacy staff (02-3 92 Ch 7). Failure to execute these tasks appropriately is 
grounds for professional discipline. Examples include failing to address a possible prescription error or situation of potential harm toa 
patient which was apparent or should have been apparent, failing to establish and maintain effective controls to prevent prescription 
errors or misfills, and failing to properly store all drugs in the pharmacy (02-3 92 Ch. 30).~ 
Based on my pharmacy education, the immunization training course, my work experiences, and clinical pharmacy rotations, I know 
that I am exceptionally well prepared to care for patients when I pass my exams and become a fully licensed pharmacist. The duty and 
responsibilities associated with that license are well known to me and is a privilege I look forward to honoring throughout my career 
by providing pharmaceutical care to the very best of my ability. This bill is an important piece that will enable me to care for my 
community. Won’t you help me carry that forward to the rest of the state of Maine? 
Husson University ’s School of Pharmacy is happy to answer any questions and work with ﬂre Committee on this legislation. Thank 
you for your time and consideration. 
Most sincerely, 
wanna, 
Olivia Moody, Class of 2024 PharmD Candidate 
Husson University School of Pharmacy 
Chair of Operation Immunization | American Pharmacists Association
