The Honorable Donna Bailey 
The Honorable Anne Perry, 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 1151, An Act to Expand Access & Decrease Barriers to Immunization 
Ad ministration as Amended 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, insurance and Financial 
Services Committee:V 
My name is Sara Couture, and l am the Manager of Pharmacy Clinical Services at Hannaford 
Supermarket and Pharmacy. l have been a licensed pharmacist for 10 years. lam a resident of Oakland, 
Maine, and I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1151. 
Hannaford Supermarket and Pharmacy has 58 pharmacies in Maine that provide access to medication 
and professional expertise throughout our state. Hannaford has always been proud of our pharmacy 
teams and their dedication to their communities, and this especially came through during the pandemic. 
ln my role, I help prepare and communicate vaccine treatment protocols or standing orders for our 
pharmacists across the five states where we operate. l feel strongly that as immunizing pharmacists, we 
are trained to follow the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices guidelines. With the many changes that came with the COVID vaccine, we 
updated our standing orders and guidance multiple times, and our pharmacists proved they are able to 
keep up with the recommendations to ensure patients are receiving the right vaccine at the correct 
dosing interval. 
When not using the authority of the PREP Act or a patient specific prescription, pharmacists are 
administering vaccines according to a practitioner signed standing order that contains information on 
vaccine dose and administration to help pharmacists make appropriate clinical decisions. in addition, 
prior to vaccine administration, patients complete a consent form that helps a pharmacist screen for 
vaccine eligibility. Maine pharmacists can access the state immunization registry to assess patient 
vaccination history. Pharmacists have the training, clinical knowledge, and access to resources to ailow 
them to safely administer vaccines without a patient specific prescription. 
We pride ourselves in being a member of a patient's healthcare team and strive to be an extension of 
the primary care provider's office in terms of closing the gap of the patient record. It is standard practice 
to ensure the patient has access to their vaccination records and that the information is on file at their 
primary care provider's office as well. Due to the COVID vaccine initiative, many pharmacies now have 
electronic processes established to automatically report all vaccines into state immunization registries. 
Since we were required to submit COVID vaccine administration data in a timely manner to the state 
registries, many pharmacies have followed suit with all vaccines for completeness. 
The impacts of the COVID pandemic are going to be felt for years to come. We know there are 
vaccination gaps, especially in the pediatric population. It is logical to me to allow pharmacists to step in 
and help with access to care. For pediatric vaccines, the pharmacy would not be the primary site for this 
patient population to have their vaccine needs met; however, we can be an integral team memberto
help patients get caught up on their vaccination schedules, encourage patients to attend their annual 
well child visits and reinforce the importance of that care. 
To get preventative care back on track, we need to work together as a team and increase access. 
Vaccines are a cornerstone of preventative healthcare. I believe we need to put trust in our trained 
healthcare providers, including our pharmacists, to do what they are very well trained to do and what 
they have been doing every day throughout the pandemic. This is a continuation of our current 
practice. Thank you for your time today. 
Sincerely, 
5, 4/20> @0412.//w 
Sara Couture, PharmD 
Manager of Pharmacy Clinical Services 
Hannaford Supermarket & Pharmacy
