Shannon James
BANGOR
LD 1151
April 6, 2023                                                      
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services
 
RE: Testimony in support of LD1151 An Act to Decrease Barriers for Preventive 
Health Services by Allowing Pharmacy Technicians to Administer Vaccines
 
Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee:
My name is Dr. Shannon James. I am a current resident of Bangor, Maine, an 
Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice at Husson University, and a practicing 
pharmacist at Northern Light Acadia Hospital. I’m here to testify in support of 
LD1151 and advocate on behalf of pharmacist trainees and members of the public. 
LD1151 represents a rational expansion to pharmacy-based immunization authority. 
Pharmacists are trained and educated to order and administer appropriate 
vaccinations. Ensuring that a vaccine is appropriate for a patient is part of the drug 
utilization review process, a required component of dispensing every prescription. 
I am a psychiatric pharmacotherapy specialist that can also administer vaccines. I am 
in no way personally excited about the eventuality of injecting a three year old child 
with a needle. However, this is a burden that I am willing to take on as I know that 
this is a crucial step in protecting Maine’s children against vaccine-preventable 
illnesses. This bill unquestionably expands pharmacy-based authority. As we are 
aware, pharmacists are not the only individuals administering vaccinations, but all 
immunizations are administered under the direct supervision of the pharmacist. What 
does direct supervision mean? The Board of Pharmacy has it defined in its rules as 
overseeing the activities of pharmacy personnel by being physically present within the
same work area as those being supervised. The Pharmacist in Charge is also 
“responsible legally and professionally for all activities related to the practice of 
pharmacy within the pharmacy for which the licensee is registered as pharmacist in 
charge” (02-392 Ch. 13).
As discussed above, the Board of Pharmacy specifies what is meant by direct 
supervision and outlines the responsibilities of the pharmacist in charge (PIC). The 
PIC is responsible for all pharmacy activities for the pharmacy they have voluntarily 
accepted responsibility for, and that does include ensuring safe and effective controls 
over medication dispensing and adherence to quality assurance policies and 
procedures. Individual pharmacists are required to complete continuing education 
credits annually, but the PIC can absolutely implement requirements to ensure 
optimized and rational care is provided to all patients. 
One of the welcome changes in the amendment is the importance of adhering to the 
immunization schedules published by the CDC. This is not because pharmacists are 
not qualified to make these decisions, but that shared clinical decision making is 
implemented when a patient falls outside of the standard recommendations by parties 
that may have greater access to the patient’s medical information. 
Husson University’s School of Pharmacy is happy to answer any questions and work 
with the committee on this legislation. Thank you for your time and consideration.
 
Most sincerely,
 
 
Shannon James, PharmD, BCPP
Husson University 

