MAlNE PHARMACY ASSOC?/¢\TIOi\J 
P.O. Box 5257 Augusta, ME 04332 I 207-204~88OO I www.mparx.org 
The Honorable Donna Bailey 
The Honorable Anne Perry, .~
y 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 1151, An Act to Expand Access & Decrease Barriers to Immunization 
Administration as Amended 
April 3, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee: _ 
My name is Wendy Boynton, and I am a resident of Scarborough Maine, a licensed pharmacist for 30 
years employed by Hannaford Supermarket and Pharmacy and the President of the Maine Pharmacy 
Association. The MPA is the state pharmacy organization that addresses the advocacy, continuing 
education and professional needs of all licensed pharmacists, pharmacy technicians and student 
pharmacists in Maine. Our mission is to promote public health by advocating for the profession of 
pharmacy. On behalf of the Maine Pharmacy Association. I am testifying today in support of LD 1151 
with the revisions worked in partnership with health care organizations, such as the Maine Medical 
Association, since the introduction of the bill. 
This bill allows for the continuation of some existing practices that were allowed in the PREP Act during 
the pandemic. The federal authority under the PREP Act gave pharmacists the ability to order and 
administer all ACIP/CDC recommended vaccines to patients aged three. and older. This bill allows 
pharmacists to continue care for those three and older with a prescription from their primary care 
physician and without a prescription for those 18 and older. The Maine Pharmacy Association is 
unaware of any other state that has the requirement of obtaining a prescription from a PCP. I am 
certain that in the other four states that Hannaford operates, there is no requirement for a specific 
prescription by the patient’s PCP. In fact, I went to New York and received my first shingles vaccine 
without a prescription, and I could have done the same in Vermont, New Hampshire, and 
Massachusetts. 
The current Maine law creates significant extra work for pharmacists and a delay in patient care for 
Mainers as the patient comes into the pharmacy assuming they can receive an immunization, as they do 
a flu shot, and are told they can't have one at this time because of the absence of a prescription. 
Pharmacists need to contact the doctor, which then may take a few days to receive the prescription and 
then they must notify the patient. With the passage of this bill, the delay and extra steps could be 
avoided and the service could be provided when requested by the patient. Further, many times, those 
later attained prescriptions are processed and abandoned. This accounts for thousands of extra 
prescriptions processed and returned. But more to the point—-an important question for patient care 
and public health: Did those patients ultimately get their immunizations or not? During a time when we 
know that immunization rates are falling across the country, it is important to our collective public 
health that we remove barriers and provide access.'
The Maine pharmacists are asking to simplify their work and help them take care of their patients at the 
time of patient’s request. Those that don't have primary care physicians already receive recommended 
vaccines from pharmacies without a doctor writing an individual prescription. That being said, we find it 
extremely important to maintain partnerships with those that have primary care physicians, continue 
communication with the practitioners, ensure updated records and even encourage the importance of 
annual visits withtheir primary care. 
We agree that we should use technology to submit all vaccination records provided in community 
setting into the state registry, as was mandated during the pandemic, so that these records are visible to 
all health care professionals to ensure proper care. We again feel notification must be made to the 
primary care physician of an individual but through modern means and not fax and paper whena 
process had been created during the pandemic for COVID vaccines. One place for viewing records is 
more efficient and timelier. Healthcare providers should be familiar with the lmmPact system in Maine 
as it is required for documentation of COVID vaccines, and some pharmacies are currently uploading all 
vaccines into it. 
This bill is important for the residents of the State of Maine and for public health and we are proud of 
the partnership created in amending the bill to the current form. 
The Maine Pharmacy Association is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this 
legislation. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Wendy Boynton 
Director of Pharmacy Operations — Hannaford 
Maine Pharmacy Association President
