E 
L“‘ 
on! 
TO: The Honorable Senator Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Representative Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: March 8, 2023 
RE: LD 737 - An Act to Prohibit Government Contracting Organizations from Inﬂuencing 
Elections / 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. 
My name is Anna Kellar. I'm a resident of Portland. l am Executive Director for the League of Women Voters 
of Maine. l am submitting testimony in qualiﬁed support of LD 737 - An Act to Prohibit Government 
Contracting Organizations from Inﬂuencing Elections. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working for over 
100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understanding of major 
public policy issues, and to inﬂuence public policy through education and advocacy. We never support or 
oppose any political party or candidate. 
The League of Women Voters believes that our government should be responsive to the will of the people 
and that it should be free from undue inﬂuence, corruption, and the appearance of corruption. We support 
measures that encourage governmental ethics and that give citizens conﬁdence that state business is being 
conducted in the public’s best interests. 
LD 737 would prohibit certain entities with government contracts from making certain types of political 
contributions. In general we think this would be a good policy for Maine to adopt. Maine would join the 
federal government, which has barred contributions from contractors for over 80 years. 52 U.S.C.§ 
30119(a)(1) (formerly 2 U.S.C. § 441c). This federal rule applies to all contractors from very large corporations 
such as Lockheed Martin to individual nurses working for a federal public health project. ‘ Seventeen other 
states have such laws. See attached list. 
We share the sponsor's concern that ﬁnancial ties from campaign contributions could undermine the integrity 
of both our democratic process and state procurement efforts. At the very least, it creates an appearance of 
undue inﬂuence which diminishes public conﬁdence in both. We can all agree that protecting our democratic 
process and ensuring the most cost-effective use of taxpayer dollars in state procurement decisions are two of 
the most important priorities of state policy. 
1 
The prohibition on contractor contributions was strengthened in 1986 with the passage of the Federal Acquisition Regulation 
(FAR). The FAR requires federal contractors to certify that they have not made and will not make any political contributions in 
violation of FECA. 
PO Box 18187, Portland, Maine 04112 | Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
wwwmainecleanelecti0ns.0rg l iii'§' r><'r1ji.rmiivr;t:i:;;r i§i.‘i1,§i‘l§£?iiS.i)i ‘g
MCCE Action to VLA March 8, 2023 
LD 737 
page2 
Government contractors are often in a unique position to inﬂuence state politicians due to their close 
relationships with those in power. Elected ofﬁcials can wield their inﬂuence at two points in the process. First, 
they can inﬂuence appropriations that may be very lucrative to vendors of goods and services. Secondly, once 
an appropriation has been made, elected ofﬁcials can inﬂuence the agency that is implementing a 
procurement effort. 
While acknowledging that our state's procurement procedures are designed to isolate vendor selection from 
political inﬂuence, and without denigrating state employees, we acknowledge that the bill sponsor's concern 
is reasonable. This behavior can lead to a perception of impropriety and undermine public trust in 
government. At the start of this year a ban on contributions from corporations to Maine candidates took 
effect. This new ban will address many of the concerns about contributions from government contractors. The 
more comprehensive prohibition on donations from state contractors to PACs and party committees in LD 737 
would further safeguard against corruption and ensure that government contracts are awarded based on 
merit and not political connections. 
This law clearly passes constitutional muster. The United States Supreme Court in decisions going back to 
Buckley v. Valeo (1976) has repeatedly upheld the constitutionality of limits on political contributions asa 
means of preventing corruption and ensuring the integrity of our democratic process. The federal prohibition 
on contractor contributions has been the subject of legal challenges, with some arguing that it violates the 
First Amendment right to free speech. However, the second-highest court in the federal system recently 
upheld the constitutionality of the prohibition, recognizing the government's interest in preventing corruption 
and the appearance of corruption. Wagner v. Federal Election Commission, 793 F.3d 1 (2015). 
it is reasonable to ask whether there are any instances of this kind of corruption in Maine. We have not seen 
any overt corruption of this type to date. Maine has relatively low limits on contributions to candidates, 
strong rules on lobbying and lobbyist contributions, and of course a Clean Elections system. But such limits do 
not apply to political parties or caucus committees, nor do they apply to independent expenditure 
committees. 
We believe that state employees working on procurement are ethical and hardworking. But many vendors 
seeking state contracts are not based in Maine and may not share our concern over avoiding the appearances 
of undue influence. For example, in 2016 a scandal involving an out—of-state contractor overtook the State of 
Nebraska. ’ The State had awarded a very large contract to a Fortune 500 company which had given "a 
tsunami" of contributions during the procurement process. The gifts included over $150,000 in contributions 
to the Governor, State Senators, a major party political committee in the state, and every member of the 
legislative committee ofjurisdiction. The contractor was awarded the contract, which subsequently turned 
out to be a disaster for the state? 
2 
Nebraska Money in Politics, Part 2, Nebraska Campaign Finance Laws Compared to Surrounding States. 
https://lwvnebraska.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/LWVN E-Money-in-Politics-Report-Part-2.pdf 
3 
There have been several other high-pro ﬁle cases where the ban on contractor contributions was egregiouslyviolated. One 
example is the case of the Enron Corporation, which was a major federal contractor and also a signiﬁcant contributor to political 
campaigns. In the 2000 election cycle, Enron and its executives gave over $2 million to federal candidates, parties, and 
committees. After Enron's collapse in 2001, it was revealed that the company had used its political contributions to gain access 
and inﬂuence in Washington, including securing favorable treatment in the awarding of government contracts. This raised 
concerns about the integrity of the federal contracting process and led to calls for further reform of the campaign finance 
system. Another example is the case of Brent Wilkes, a defense contractor who was convicted of bribing former Rep. Randy
MCCE Action to VLA March 8, 2023 
LD 737 
Page3 
The problem of the appearance of corruption is real. if a contractor contributes to a candidate who is elected 
to a position with inﬂuence over the awarding of government contracts, it could be seen as an attempt to gain 
favoritism or an unfair advantage in the bidding process, or more likely, in regulating the affected sector. Of 
course, legislators and the governor don't personally award contracts, but they do have control over the 
appropriation of funding and the types of projects and vendors to which it is applied. They also have regular 
interactions with state agencies and those who make procurement decisions. It is not hard to see how 
contributions from prospective vendors could undermine public trust in the fairness and impartiality of 
government decision-making. There is also evidence to suggest that campaign contributions are not merelya 
problem of optics, but can actually have an inﬂuence on the award of contracts. ‘ 
Though we generally support the concept, the text of LD 737 raises some speciﬁc questions. First, the bill 
refers to unions, but it is not entirely clear whether the reference to “contract ” includes a collective 
bargaining agreement, and if so how the $500,000 threshold would be applied. It is unlikely that any 
individual union member has a contract with the State worth $500,000. The aggregate of all salary payments 
to individual union members and other employees resulting from a collective bargaining agreement could 
easily exceed $500,000. But the union itself is a separate entity from the individual members. So it is not clear 
how LD 737 would apply to unions and their members. 
Second, the scope of the proposed law is also unclear. Would it prohibit a contractor from making any 
contribution to "a candidate, a political action committee, a political party or a political organization 
registered as a tax-exempt organization . . . ."? Or would it only prohibit contributions speciﬁcally used in an 
"effort to inﬂuence an election in the State . . . .”? Either interpretation is possible. Where First Amendment 
rights are involved, it is important to minimize any uncertainty. 
Third, contributions to organizations registered with the IRS under U.S. Code section 501(c)(4) are covered by 
the bill but apparently contributions to organizations such as super PACs and 527 groups are not included. We 
question why the bill takes the approach, since super PACs and 527 groups are even more “political ” than 
501(c)(4) nonproﬁt organizations. More fundamentally, applying the prohibition to non-proﬁt organizations 
might extend the scope too far. We suggest that the bill focus on contributions to candidates, independent 
expenditure committees, and political party committees where the appearance of undue inﬂuence is the 
most direct. 
Fourth, the term "contribution" is not deﬁned in the bill. The term is deﬁned in the campaign ﬁnance section 
of the statutes as it applies to something of value given to a candidate, party committee or political action 
committee. Title 21-A, sections 1012(2) and 1052(3). The deﬁnition in Title 21-A does not address money 
received by a 501(c)(4) non-proﬁt that does not report as a PAC. The bill would be strengthened by a clear 
deﬁnition of "contribution" either by reference to Title 21-A or added to this section of Title 5. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l would be happy to answer any questions. 
"Duke" Cunningham (R~CA) in exchange for millions of dollars in federal contracts. Wilkes and his associates had made 
signiﬁcant political contributions to Cunningham and other members of Congress in an effort to secure favorable treatment for 
their company. 
4 
Christopher Witko, Campaign Contributions, Access, and Government Contracting, Journal of Public Administration Research 
and Theory: J-PART, Vol. 21, No. 4 (October 2011), pp. 761-778, Oxford University Press.
Contractor Contribution Regulations Enacted in Other States 
At ieast seventeen states have enacted iimits or prohibitions on campaign contributions from 
prospective and/or current governmental contractors or iicensees.                        
. Cal. Gov't Code §84308(d) 
. Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 9-612(g)(1), (2) 
. Haw. Rev. Stat. § 11-355 30 
Iii. Comp. Stat. 500/50-37 
. Ind. Code §§ 4-30-3-19.5, -19.7 
Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. §121.33O 
. La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 18:1505.2(L), id. §27:261(D) 
Mich. Comp. Laws § 432.207b 
9. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 9-803, 49-1476.01 
10. NJ. Stat. Ann. §§ 19:44A-20.13, -.14 
11. N.iVi. Stat. Ann. §3-1—191.1(E) 
12. Ohio Rev. Code § 3517.13(i)-(Z) 53 
13. Pa. Cons. Stat. § 895.704-A(a) 
14. S.C. Code Ann. § 8-13-1342 
15. Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 32, § 109(8) 
16. Va. Code Ann. § Z.2~3104.01 
17. vv. Va. Code § 3-8-12(d). 
Source: amicus brief found at 
https://wvvw.fec.gov/resources/legaI-resources/Iitigation/wagner_amici_brief.pdf, pages 4-12
National Conference on State Legislatures Bill Tracking 
Recent Legislative Initiatives Relating to Contractor Contributions 
Topics: Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
States: All States 
Year: 2023 
l-ll S 1450 
Campaign Contributions 
Date of Last Action: 1/24/2023 
Author: lhara (D) Additional Authors: Awa (R);Elefante (D) 
Topics: Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Requires all public contractors to explicitly agree through a provision in their 
public contracts to be subject to the prohibition and penalties for any violations of 
campaign finance laws. 
History: Click for History 
ll. H 2808 
Election Code 
Date of Last Action: 2/16/2023 
Author: Delgado (D) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Amends the Election Code, provides that a contractor that provides 
equipment and services for automated lavv enforcement, automated speed 
enforcement, or automated railroad grade crossing enforcement systems to 
municipalities or counties or any political action committee created by such a contractor 
may not make a campaign contribution to any political committee established to 
promote the candidacy of a candidate or public official in an aggregate value over $500 
in a calendar year/. 
History: Click for History 
l\/lE S 295 
State Contracts 
Date of Last Action: 2/15/2023 
Author: Brakey (R) Additional Authors: Bennett (R);Timberlake (R);Harrington 
(R);Andrews (R) 
Topics: Contribution Limits, Other Contributions, Government 
Contractors/Employees/Unions
Summary: Requires that every contract with the state in an amount over $500,000 have 
a clause that prohibits the other contracting party from influencing state elections 
through contributions to a candidate, a political action committee, a political party ora 
political organization that is a tax-exempt organization/. 
History: Click for History 
MA l-l 817 
Campaign Vendors 
Date of Last Action: 3/29/2021 
Author: l\/lirra (R)' 
Topics: Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Relates to campaign vendors. 
History: Click for History 
NH H 1252 
Political Contributions Made by Business Entities 
Date of Last Action: 1/5/2022 
Author: Love (R) 
Topics: Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Prohibits any business organization that receives grants from the state of 
New Hampshire from making any contribution to any candidate or political committee. 
History: Click for History 
NJ S 394 
Campaign Contributions 
Date of Last Action: 1/11/2022 
Author: Johnson (D) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Administration and Enforcement, Government 
Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Associated Bills: NJ A 1842 - Identical 
Summary: Prohibits businesses receiving State development subsidies from making 
certain campaign contributions. 
History: Click for History 
NJ A 1842 
Campaign Contributions 
Date of Last Action: 1/11/2022 
Author: Park (D)
Topics: Other Contributions, Administration and Enforcement, Government 
Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Associated Bills: NJ S 394 - identical 
Summary: Prohibits businesses receiving state development subsidies from making 
certain campaign contributions. 
History: Click for History 
NY S 2920 
2023 
Political Contribution by Business With State Contracts 
Date of Last Action: 1/26/2021 
Author: Addabbo (D) 
Topics: Contribution Limits, Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Prohibits political contributions by businesses that have been awarded state 
contracts. 
History: Click for History 
NY A 5839 
Government Vendor Contributions 
Date of Last Action: 5/20/2021 
Author: Galef (D) Additional Authors: Gottfried (D);Paulin (D);Rivera J (D);McDonough 
(R);Abinanti (D);Davila (D);Simon (D);Manktelow (R) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Disclosure, Administration and Enforcement, Government 
Contractors/Employees/Unions, Definitions 
Associated Bills: (2021) NY S 483 - Same as 
Summary: Relates to government vendor contributions, provides that it shall be unlawful 
during the restricted vendor contribution period for any person, organization, or 
business entity that submits a bid, quotation, offer or response to a state governmental 
entity posting or solicitation for a procurement to make a contribution to any officeholder 
of or with authority over the state governmental entity or entities responsible for issuing 
such procurement posting or solicitation. 
History: Click for History 
PA H 709 
Public Contracting 
Date of Last Action: 3/1/2021 
Author: Zabel (D) Additional Authors: Delloso (D);Krajewski (D);O‘Mara (D);Webster 
(D);Shusterman (D);Sanchez (D);Otten (D);Lee (D);lnnamorato (D);Hanbidge
(D);Freeman (D);Ciresi (D);Burgos (D);McNeill J (D);lVladden (D);Hill-Evans 
(D);Schweyer (D);Davis (D);Moul (R);Galloway (D) 
Topics: Disclosure, Administration and Enforcement, Government 
Contractors/Employees/Unions, Definitions 
Summary: Relates to ethics in public contracting, provides for definitions and for 
disclosure of contributions by contractors. 
History: Click for History 
PR S 112 
Political Party Donations and Disclosure 
Date of Last Action: 1/12/2021 
Author: Bernabe (CVM) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Creates the Law to Prohibit Donations to Political Parties or Candidates by 
Government Contractors and Force Government Contractors to Disclose their 
Donations and Political Expenses, prohibits donations to political parties or candidates 
by government contractors, forces potential government contractors and contractors to 
disclose their donations and political expenses, create the Registry of donations and 
expenses of government contractors. 
History: Click for History 
PR S 341 
Government Contracts and Political Donations 
Date of Last Action: 4/29/2021 
Author: Rivera Schatz (PNP) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Summary: Amends Law 222 of 2011, the Law for the Supervision of the Financing of 
Political Campaigns in Puerto Rico, to establish a general prohibition so that no natural 
or legal person, who has contracts or aspires to have contracts with the Government of 
Puerto Rico can make political donations or expenses related to political campaigns 90 
days before the general elections, having a government contract or after obtaining said 
contract. 
History: Click for History 
SC S 312 
Unlawful Contributions and Expenditures 
Date of Last Action: 1/12/2021 
Author: Fanning (D) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions
Associated Bills: (2021) SC H 3523 - Similar 
Summary: Relates to unlawful contributions and expenditures, prohibits members of the 
General Assembly or candidates for the General Assembly from soliciting or accepting 
campaign contributions from a utility, company, corporation, entity, joint venture, or 
person who possesses or maintains an exclusive right to conduct its business, 
enterprise, operations, or activities statewide or within a geographically defined area or 
territory pursuant to an act of the General Assembly. 
History: Click for History 
SC H 3623 
Unlawful Contributions and Expenditures 
Date of Last Action: 1/12/2021 
Author: Cobb-Hunter (D) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Disclosure, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions 
Associated Bills: (2021) SC S 312 — Similar 
Summary: Relates to unlawful contributions and expenditures, prohibits members of the 
General Assembly or candidates for the General Assembly from soliciting or accepting 
campaign contributions from a utility, company, corporation, entity, joint venture, or 
person, as defined in section 8-13-1300, who possesses or maintains an exclusive right 
to conduct its business, enterprise, operations, or activities statewide or withina 
geographically defined area or territory pursuant to an act of the General Assembly. 
History: Click for History 
VA S 45 
Campaign Finance 
Date of Last Action: 1/12/2022 
Author: Petersen (D) Additional Authors: Kory (D);LaRock (R);Roem (D) 
Topics: Other Contributions, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions, Definitions 
Summary: Relates to campaign finance, relates to prohibited contributions to 
candidates, prohibits candidates, campaign committees, and political committees from 
soliciting or accepting contributions from any public utility, as defined in the bill, and 
prohibits any public utility or any political committee established by such public utility 
from making any such contribution. 
History: Click for History 
VA H 71 
Campaign Finance 
Date of Last Action: ‘l/12/2022 
Author: Ware R (R) Additional Authors: Kory (D);Freitas (R);Roem (D);Hudson (D)
Topics: Other Contributions, Government Contractors/Employees/Unions, Definitions 
Summary: Relates to campaign finance, relates to prohibited contributions to 
candidates, relates to Phase I Utility and Phase ll Utility, prohibits candidates, campaign 
committees, and political committees from soliciting or accepting contributions from any 
public utility, as defined in the bill, and prohibits any public utility or any political 
committee established by such public utility from making any such contribution. 
History: Click for History
