mi2 
1* .';~»§7¢ “ 
.i.:-"I" ."
Q 
.. W1». 
E";*—'"-' 
Eric Brakey 13 ls‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 737, An Act to Prohibit Government Contracting 
Organizations from Inﬂuencing Elections 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today as I present L.D. 737, An 
Act to Prohibit Government Contracting Organizations from Inﬂuencing Elections. 
In recent decades, there has been much policy discussion on ways to eliminate the inﬂuence of 
special interest money in politics. \lVhile there are legitimate constitutional concerns about many 
proposed and adopted methods for campaign ﬁnance reform, today I am bringing you one 
measure completely consistent with our First Amendment. 
Recently, the Maine Legislature passed a law prohibiting lobbyists from donating to candidates 
seeking election outside of the district where they live. For example, a lobbyist from Freeport 
could not donate to my campaign as Freeport is not part of my Senate district. 
At the federal level, other actions have been taken to tighten pay-to-play election laws. One of 
those actions included prohibiting government contractors from making political contributions to 
federal candidates, political parties, and political action committees. L.D. 737 has a similar aim 
— prohibiting a contracting party of the state that receives over $500,000 in taxpayer money 
from donating to a state candidate, political party, political action committee, or a political 
organization with a 501(c)(4) status. The timeframe that state contractors would be prohibited 
from doing so would include the duration of the contract and the two years following. 
Since this refonn builds upon the right to contract, not blanket prohibitions on speech, 
organizations have the right to accept the terms of the contract or not. One of those terms would 
be notdonating to inﬂuence elections. If they don’t want to give up this ability, they can forgo 
the contact and the taxpayer money that comes with it. 
In addition to tightening campaign spending loopholes at the federal level, pay-to-play election 
reform has become law in 13 states. 
Passing this legislation is an action the Legislature can take to close the revolving door of 
taxpayer money being used to lobby for more taxpayer money. 
Thank you for your consideration.
alt NCSL NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF STATE LEGISLATURES 
Strong States. Strong Nation 
Pay-to-Play States 
Updated March 7, 2023 
State Types of Contracts 
Covered Contribution Limits 
of Contracting 
Business Entity Contribution Limits 
of PAC Assoc. with 
Business Entity Contribution Limits 
of Ofticers & Partners 
of Business Entity Entity1'0f ﬁceholder 
Subject to Limit 
a. ov 0e 
84308 No—bid and competitive 
No minimum threshold Prohibited $250 $250 dollars for 
individual agents or 
party representatives State and local agency 
ofﬁcers 
Connecticut 
Conn. Gen. Stat. 9- 
E California 
C l G 'tC d§ 
i_.____§_ 
Conn. Gen. Stat. §9~ 
Q12 No-bid and competitive 
$50,000 threshold for 
single contract 
$100,000 threshold for 
single contract Prohibited $5,000/gub. candidate 
$1,500/state senate 
candidate 
$750/state house 
candidate Prohibited for state 
contractors, prospective 
state contractors, 
members of their 
immediate family& 
their communicator 
lobbyist Legislative and statewide 
office candidates 
PACs established or 
controlled by those 
candidates 
Leadership and caucus 
committees 
Party committees 
Illinois 
30 ILCS 500~37 No-bid and competitive 
$50,000 threshold Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited for all 
members with at least 
7_5% controlling 
interest Govemor, lt. gov, AG, 
sec. state, comptroller, 
treasurer, and candidates 
for these ofﬁces 
Indiana 
Ind_ Code Ann. § 4-30- 
3- 19.5 
Ind. Code Ann. § 4-30- 
3-19.7 State lottery contracts 
No minimum threshold Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited State candidates, 
legislative candidates, 
party committees, 
caucuses
Kentucky 
KRS§ 12105612) 
KRS § 121.330 No-bid only 
No minimum threshold Prohibited $2,100 $2,100 for individuals 
with a “substantial ” 
ownership interest Gubernatorial candidates 
Louisiana 
La. Rev. Stat. Arm.§ 
l8:1505.2 Any casino operating 
license entity/‘hurricane 
rebuilding efforts 
No minimum threshold Prohibited Unlimited Prohibited Candidates seeking 
reelection 
Nebraska 
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 9~835 
Neb. Rev. Stat § 49- 
l476.0l(1 ) State lottery contracts 
$25,000 minimum 
threshold Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Any candidates for 
statewide office 
New Jersey 
NJ Stat. §l9:44A-20.13 
€t seg. No-bid and competitive 
$17,500 threshold Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Candidates for pertinent 
state ofﬁce 
State and local parties 
Leadership PACs 
New Mexico 
NM Stat. §l3-l-191.1 No-bid and competitive 
No minimum threshold Prohibited Unlimited Prohibited Elected ofﬁcials 
responsible for contracts 
South Carolina 
S.C. Code §8-13-1342 No-bid only 
No minimum threshold Prohibited Unlimited Unlimited Candidates for pertinent 
state and local ofﬁce 
Vermont 
Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 32,§ 
E No-bid and competitive 
with State Treasurer ’s 
office 
No minimum threshold Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited State Treasurer 
Candidates 
Virginia 
V84 Code §2.2-4376.1 No-bid only 
$5 million threshold Prohibited Unlimited $50 Governor 
Source: National Conference ofState Legislatures 
March 2023
West Virginia No~bid and competitive Prohibited Unlimited Unlimited All state candidates and 
W.Va. Code §3-8-121d) No minimum threshold parties 
1 New Jersey also limits contributions from business entities, their officers and ofﬁcers' spouses and dependents to $250 or less to candidates and 
officeholders ultimately responsible for the contract — during the calendar year prior to commencement ‘ of negotiations. 
0 In Connecticut, state agencies and quasi-public agencies report to the SEEC the names of their contractors and prospective contractors which meet 
ﬁnancial threshold of having or seeking to obtain a state contract valued at $50,000 or more from a single agency or $100,000 with multiple agencies. 
The SEEC publishes the names of the state contractors and prospective state contractors on its website as reported by the contracting state agencies. 
I New Jersey's law is part of the govemment contracting statutes, clearly grants enforcement authority to the state contracting agent, and includes speciﬁc 
penalties including the immediate revocation of a contract and a suspension from further government contracting for four years. 
Source: National Conference of State Legislatures 
March Z023
