Testimony of Emily Albee 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other distinguished members of the Education 
and Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Emily Albee. I am a resident of Orono and the 
2022 Penobscot County Teacher of the Year. I am an educator and a proud member of the 
Maine Education Association. I am here today to testify in support of LD 955, 974, 1237, and 
1314. These 4- bills are crucial steps to address the compensation inadequacies and retention 
struggles of our education support professionals, one of the crucial pillars of our Maine public 
schools. 
Schools cannot operate and function without the amazing work and dedicated contributions of 
education support professionals. The interconnected teamwork and support provided by our 
ESP’s begins for many of our students with their bus driver in the morning. Drivers entrusted 
with student safety and providing a supportive relationship shapes their school day. For some of 
our students who struggle with extreme anxiety and attending school, stepping onto that bus feels 
like summiting Katahdin on a daily basis. For a majority of the school year, students arrive to 
school with early morning plowed and shoveled school parking lots and sidewalks by our 
custodial staff for a safe drop off experience. Students walking by the front office, are greeted by 
administrative assistants who are guaranteed to know their names, providing another anchor for 
students to feel seen and welcomed into the building. The fabulous kitchen staff working hard to 
provide nutritious and delicious meals for students to support their physical and academic health. 
Inside the classroom and resource room, our Education Technicians providing crucial academic 
and behavioral supports for students with modiﬁed instructional and assessment strategies and at 
times behavior deescalation. After students leave the building, the mostly unseen hard work 
begins for our custodial staff to clean, ﬁx, and maintain our building while also setting up for 
events like sports games, concerts, and board meetings. 
I have personally witnessed our ESP teammates leaving our school at unprecedented rates. 
Simply put, education support professionals cannot afford to stay working in the jobs they love, 
building relationships with students. This heart wrenching decision to leave education is not 
made lightly. The inadequate salaries of our ESP’s are not even close to keeping up with the 
challenges of inﬂation, cost of living increases, and other ﬁnancial pandemic ripple effects. It isa 
stunning injustice that ESP’s are forced into making tough ﬁnancial choices because heating oil 
and healthcare expenses cannot happen at the same time, getting food from local food pantries 
because snow days changed weekly take home earnings, and ESP’s not feeling like valued 
members of the education profession. 
The inadequate salaries of ESP’s are not recruiting workers to ﬁll employment vacancies leading 
to unprecedented shortages of ESP teammates in our Maine schools. Bus driver shortages impact 
the practicality of students getting to and from school and missing out on key student support 
relationships. I have seen our administrative assistants helping with snow removal and kitchen 
service duties because of employment shortages. Education technicians are doing more with less 
as their caseloads increase and they cannot meet all of the academic and behavioral needs of 
students. Our public schools need appropriately compensated education support professionals to 
recruit and retain this vital pillar of support for our Maine students. I urge the Committee to 
unanimously support these 4 bills and vote ought to pass.
