MAINE 
BEER 8: WINE March 28' 2023 DISTRIBUTORS ASSOCIATION 
DELIVERING QUALITY AND CHOICE. 
ADVOCATING RESPONSIBILITY. 
LD 134 An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and 
Redemption Centers 
AMENDED: An Act to Support Maine's Bottle Bill by Stabilizing Redemption Center Handling Fees and 
Reducing Processing Time 
LD 972 — Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to Evaluate Strategies for 
Improving the Returnable Beverage Container Laws 
Good Morning, Senator Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources committee. I am Cheryl Timberlake, a resident of Mt. Vernon. I'm here today on 
behalf of the Maine Beer Wine Distributors (MBWD) and the Maine Beer Wine Commingling Group, LLC 
(MBWCG); family owned and operated local beverage companies who are the front lines of the bottle 
redemption since the inception of the law. You have heard from one of our members and other 
industry stakeholders explaining the economics and logistics of the system. 
APPRECIATION 
The bottle redemption program is complicated; it involves many stakeholders and economic challenges. 
We appreciate the sponsors bringing forward these bills and the opportunity to engage with the 
committee and interested parties to drive costs out of the system and keep our state beautiful. 
MBWD is in SUPPORT of legislation that will reduce bottle bill costs for ALL its stakeholders (including 
redemption centers AND Maine beverage consumers). 
MBWD believes this can be achieved by cooperating with other beverage distributors and redemption 
centers to MODERNIZE and SlMPLlFY the system for sorting and collecting recyclable beverage containers 
OPPOSITION 
MBWD opposes LD 134 as the amended. The increased handling fee coupled with the automatic 
biannual escalator tied to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) will not address the system flaws, it only adds 
costs. 
The Emergency Preamble and summary state that there is a need to stabilize the redemption program 
that is overwhelmed by volume of containers. The redemption center business model is based on 
volume of containers — handling fee paid per unit container redeemed. 
While there is no doubt there is a labor shortage and wages and operating costs are increasing during 
this time of inflation, all businesses are impacted, as well as the consumer. increasing the handling fee 
does not address the "stability" ofthe program. 
Maine Beer and Wine Distributors Association 
96 State Street, Suite 2 I PO Box 615 I Augusta, ME 04332-0615 
Fax (207) 521-0175 I Phone: (207) 523-5245I 
wwwmainebeerandwine. org
The sorting of containers varies by redemption center business model, hand sorting versus use of 
reverse vending machines. The proposed amendment would permit the use of data sampling, relieving 
the RVM's of the requirement to count every container. 
MBWD opposes the provision to waive the requirement that individual beverage containers be scanned. 
First, we are unclear on the purpose and intent of this provision. The bottle bill program is built on 
beverage container counts. Fees are compensated for the volume of containers sorted by the licensed 
entities. 
Second, how will the Department determine what is meant by ”for good cause"? 
Third, why is there a one-year duration? 
Bottle bill is based on accuracy, transparency — per container, per count, per label validation. 
MBWCG has concerns with fraud and the impact of out of state containers; containers with no UPC or 
UPC not registered with DEP. The UPC validation is vital to ensure the unit belongs in our system. For 
example; Yuengling is a beer that is very popular but not sold in Maine therefore there is no IOD and no 
deposit. How does the scanned sampling system ensure accuracy of these out of state units? 
Trust and confidence in system and the ability to track and record accurate data is imperative! 
However, MBWCG recognizes that the definition for RVMs should be updated to reflect current the "Bag 
Drop Program" . Section 3 of the amendment is a direct conflict with this as bag drop requires each 
container to be counted. 
MBWD appreciates your time and will be here to work with the committee on these issues.
