South Portland Redemption Center  
 
Testimony of Dave Tremberth in Support of LD LD 134  
“An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and Redemption Centers ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
March 29, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources my name  is Dave  Tremberth , I manage  the South Portland  
Redemption Center  and live in Scarborough. I  am here  today to support  LD 134 and share  my experiences  
with the Committee  operating a  redemption business.  
The South Portland Redemption  Center  is a woman -owned business  located  on one of the busiest  city 
roads  in Maine  with  an average of 23,000 cars traveling  by daily.  Founded in  2014, we’ve  seen steady  
growth in our volume  and increased  pressure as  other  redemption centers close their doors .  
This is a unique  business,  each container  that comes through the window  means our  business  is paying  
the customer  and then  we must  rush  to process  so we can get paid. Management  of cash  flow  is always  a 
challenge.  At our location, we have  two operating  windows  where  we collect  bottles  and cans.  Outback  
we have  a sorting  area where  we operate  Reverse Vending Machines ( RVMs ) and organize  containers  
that cannot  be processed  through the  machines.  Before  we utilized  the RVMs  we had more  than 600 sorts  
for one pickup agent.  On a busy day  during summer,  we can process 35,000 to 40,000 containers  through 
the window . Often  that requires  a second  shift  to get those  bottles  prepared for pick  up and  then  ten days  
later for payment.   
Like every  Maine  business , the cost of operations  has skyrocketed. Everything  from  utility  costs,  winter  
maintenance, labor , and insurance. We’ve  also struggled to  maintain  a steady  crew,  and that’s  created  
additional  pressure for everyone  who does  show  up when  expected.  As those  costs  rise,  we don’t  have  a 
mechanism  to increase  our income.  It’s a tricky  game,  the more  volume  we have,  the more  upfront  money  
goes out the window  and that cycle continues.  While  the RVMs  have  helped  us keep  the place clean,  and 
reduced the added pressure of hundreds  of sorts,  they also have  a cost to operate,  lease, and  staff  to 
maximize  their  usefulness.  Everything  we do is really  four  steps,  collect  through the window, sort , 
process,  and then  move  to the pickup area.   
Prior  to covid, we had more  than twelve  employees  who  worked full or part-time and others  who  would  
work  nights  or weekends  in the back -room  processing. During covid  our volume  begin  to increase,  as did 
our costs but  we also lost about  half our available  team.  We’ve  worked  hard  to ensure  our base of 
employees  remains  all year,  even  during slow  periods, because we  cannot  afford  to have  additional  
turnover. What  this really  means is  that we are under  tremendous  stress  to keep  our doors  open.  
This bill is a positive  start,  but we need  relief  right  away.  Another  season  at the same  handling fee will 
reduce  the number  of local  redemption  centers.  I want  to thank  the Senate  President  and other  sponsors  of 
this bill. I urge  the Committee  to pass  a handling fee  increase with  an emergency  bill so this summer  we 
can adequately  manage  the volume  and keep  up with  our rising  costs.  Thank  you, I am happy t o answer  
any questions.   
