Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 134
To the Maine Legislature, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:
I am writing in support of LD 134, "An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for 
Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and Redemption Centers." While this bill
focuses on the stability of container redemption centers, those centers would benefit, 
in addition to receiving more money for their services, by being able to recycle more 
containers.
Every morning, about 7-7:15 AM, my partner and I walk about 1 1/2-2 miles around 
our neighborhood in Old Capehart, Bangor. Mostly neighborhood streets and 
occasionally on Ohio Street, Davis Road, and Finson Road. I pick up returnable 
bottles and cans while we walk, then put them in larger bags for redemption. I 
probably get $60-70 per year just collecting someone else’s “throwaways.” There are 
also a lot of crushed cans and bottles that are not currently redeemable too. Too bad, 
because they are probably just as re-usable and are better brought in than left on the 
street. 
There are also just as many plastic cups and straws, thanks to our takeout fast food 
establishments. Why do food stores selling bottles and cans have to charge for 
returnables and restaurants or takeout food places, that contribute equally to our 
trash-laden roadsides, not have to take responsibility? It doesn’t seem right. Of 
course, why do people throw their bottles, cans, and cups on roadsides in the first 
place? That isn’t a demonstration of respect for our environment either. 
What does seem right is to require takeout food places to also charge customers five 
cents per beverage cup (including covers), and another two cents per plastic straw, for
every drink they sell.  Then they can contribute to keeping our roadsides and 
communities cleaner and not (as) overrun with plastic cups and straws, as they are 
now. By expanding the number of items that can be returned and recycled, that can 
also help keep bottle redemption centers in better financial shape, and our 
communities cleaner.
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706 or larryd@myfairpoint.net

