“,‘f;1‘T“-“-1?IT,””"“'”’1’5 WWW?-’-atr -"'""-*1 ” 
...;~=;" 
"111;- _ -~M='.;;_; “:;W -'r"‘:
i 
CENTRAL DISTRIBUTORS, INC. 
Maine's Leading Beverage Distributor 
Testimony in Opposition to 
LD 132A 
RE: An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers... 
Testimony in Support of 
LD 972 
RE: Resolve, Directing the DEP to Evaluate Strategies for Improving... 
March 29, 2023 
Good morning: 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlioh and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment & Natural Resources: My name is Mike 
Barriault, I am a resident of Auburn and I am the President and a 4‘h generation 
family owner of Central Distributors in Lewiston, a local family operated beverage 
distributor. Our family also operates Aroostook Beverage Co. in Presque Isle. We 
employ approximately 160 Maine people, about 20 of which are residents of 
Aroostook County. We are a member of the Maine Beer & Wine Distributors 
association, and I serve as vice president of the Maine Beer & Wine Commingling 
Group. 
Our groups oppose a handling fee increase because increasing costs will just be an 
additional ﬁnancial burden on Maine consumers and not solve any of the real 
problems in the bottle bill. Please remember that Maine already has the highest 
handling fee in the entire country - something is very wrong here. We are however 
in support of the resolve help ﬁnd real solutions to make it more modern and 
efﬁcient for everyone. Further, we have been part of an industry group that has 
been working very hard over the past few months to help craft a bill that will 
signiﬁcantly reduce costs for redemption centers. 
I look forward to being a part of these hearings and work sessions, and I am happy 
to answer any questions and to work with all of the industry stakeholders to ﬁnd 
real solutions we can all agree on. In the meantime, I will leave you with justa 
few key points I hope you Will consider. 
15 Foss Rd - P.O. Box 1936 - Lewiston, ME 04241-1936 1/3 
(207) 784-4026 - 1-800-427-5757 - Fax (207) 784-7869 - www.centraIdistributors.com
1. The Bottle Bill is Expensive for Distributors and Consumers 
Qperating the bottle bill is very expensive. Aside from handling fees, there are 
also also truck costs, fuel costs, labor costs, facility/equipment costs, and 
ultimately recycling costs. It surprises many that because Maine is one of only two 
states that have wine in their bottle bill that many bottles continue to be hand 
labeled by our employees with a deposit sticker. We also incur costs to redeem 
fraudulent containers that come in from out-of-state. 
Please consider that every ‘/1 penny increase to the handling fee (on approximately 
1 billion containers) is approximately $5 million of cost that will be passed on to 
Maine beverage consumers. A full penny increase is $10 million, and so on. 
2. Simple Economics — Volume is Key 
One of the arguments that you will usually hear is that every time the handling fee 
is increased, more redemption centers open. When more redemption centers open, 
the pool of handling fee revenue is then split among more centers. When this 
happens, redemption centers appear to struggle to achieve a proﬁtable volume. 
But those who do achieve volume appear to do well. The economic key here is to 
prevent dilution of revenue among them. A new increase to the handling fee may 
entice more centers to open (where they are not necessarily needed), thereby 
diluting the revenue pool for all. 
3. Redemption Business Model — Premiums / Pickup Services 
We believe it would be helpful to study the volume relative to expenses ofa 
redemption center before deciding if a handling fee increase is necessary. Not only 
is it important to see what kind of volume is necessary to have a center break-even, 
but you need to understand other areas where centers are spending the handling 
fee. In our area, we have seen a lot of advertising by redemption centers offering 
it money on empties to entice people to return empties there (e.g. “l5% extra”, 
or “6 cents”). This is handling fee revenue that is essentially given away. Other 
centers offer pickup services to bars and restaurants, which is ﬁne, but not 
necessarily something that was designed to be supported by the handling fee. 
4. Beverage Retail / Redemption Center — Winning Combination 
Beverage retailers who also operate redemption centers offer a winning 
combination. Because they are partners in the beverage sales industry, they tend to 
2/3
understand the sensitivities of what an increased handling fee does to the price and 
demand of our products. We are both working to hold the price down for our 
customers. Beverage retailers also have a special incentive to operate redemption 
centers because they can attract customers to their store. The redemption service 
offers more yahig to the retailer than strictly handling fee revenue. Look at 
Hannaford/CLYNK, for instance. CLYNK is a very attractive program that brings 
customers to their stores to drop off empties and also spend at the store. 
5. Reverse Vending Machines (RVMs) / Bag Drop Models - Efﬁcient 
In an enviromnent of increased costs and labor difﬁculty, RVMs appear to offera 
solution of automating much of the bottle bill sorting requirements. From our 
perspective, while RVMs are not always a perfect solution, they do appear to offer 
efﬁciency where sorting for multiple brands, distributors, and material is 
signiﬁcantly reduced. 
The “Bag Drop” model is also a very smart change we have seen recently. Rather 
than waiting for their returns to be counted, a customer can simply drop their 
marked bags off and the money shows up in their account automatically. The 
redemption center also gains the beneﬁt of not having to staff their center during 
low trafﬁc times of the day or week. This is a great model for parts of the state 
that just do not have the volume to support a stand-alone redemption center. 
6. Commingling Works / Can We Do More? 
Commingling effectively decreases cost for redemption centers by consolidating 
sorts and pickup distributors. Our beer & wine commingling group consolidates 
sorts at a ratio of approximately 3 to 1 (sometimes 4 to 1). Our greater industry 
group has been working on programs to effectively help commingle the current 
non-comminglers, and even a mechanism to form a “cooperative of commingling 
groups” to eliminate manual brand sorting all-together. This will be difﬁcult and 
expensive for our groups to achieve — but it will save time and money fora 
redemption centers. 
Our industry members have found the way to work smarter to save cost for 
everyone. We are anxious to share this with you. 
I appreciate this opportunity to address the Committee, and Would be pleased to 
participate in work session and respond to any questions. 
— Thank you, Mike B. 
3/3
