MAINE BEVERAGE 
ASSOCIATION 
Testimony of Newell Augur 
Director, Maine Beverage Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 134, An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for 
Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and Redemption Centers 
March 29, 2023 
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environ t d N '' 
men an atural Resources, my name is Newell Augur. I am a resident 
of Yarmouth and a lawyer with Pierce Atwood. I represent the members of the Maine Beverage 
Association, your local distributors of a variety of refreshing products includin diet sodd g a, so a, 
juices, sports drinks and, increasingly, water. I am here to testify neither for nor against LD 134, 
A A tt I ' ' ' 
n c 0 ncrease the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and 
Redemption Centers. 
Beverages, beverage containers, consumers, recycling, and technology have all changed 
dramatically in the last 50 years. Making each distributor individually responsible for its 
containers - which in turn requires redemption centers to sort containers by brand — made 
sense in the 197O’s. 45 years later, it has become an antiquated method of collection that has 
iedtom .. .. . ... . 
assive inefficiencies and significant costs, both for redemption centers and distributors. 
It is that requirement to sort by brand that, when combined with the ex ansion of M ' 
’ 
bI 
p aine s otte 
bill, has led to unusually high costs. The handling fee was raised a full cent -— nearly 30% — in 
2019. M ' ' ' ' ‘ 
aine has the highest handling fee in the country. New York’s IS 3.5 cents; Connecticut ’s 
ranges from 2.5 to 3.5 cents; Massachusetts ’ ranges from 2.25 to 3.25 cents, all states witha 
much higher cost of living. Maine beverage consumers pay $45 million in handling fees every 
year 
The problem is the system we have today has not kept up with the times. As an one who’b y s een 
inside of a redemption center knows, most bottles returned for deposit in Maine are individually 
cou t d b h' 
n e y and and sorted by brand and size — a tremendous expense. That's exactly the
same as in 1978 when the bottle bill was implemented. Other states have adapted to these 
changes and followed approaches to keep recycling rates high, control costs and improve 
convenience for consumers. Beverage distributors in Oregon have built an entirely automated 
system for collecting containers that is self-funding and has no handling fee. Beverage 
distributors and producers of other consumer products in Colorado supported — and helped 
pass — legislation giving them the authority to design an efficient and cost-effective way to 
collect their packaging for recycling without a deposit. 
Our goal is to ensure we get every bottle back. The containers we sell are made to be remade. 
We want them back so we can recycle them and so they don’t end up in our roads, rivers or 
landfills. We ought to be able to achieve that goal and at the same time be respectful of the 
costs that Maine consumers must pay. 
In 2004, Maine beverage distributors introduced an innovative commingling program to simplify 
redemption and lower system costs. Despite the successes of commingling, labor and space 
requirements for non-commingled brands continue to drive up costs. The non-commingled 
brands generally are not produced in Maine and the manufacturers of these brands do not have 
employees in Maine distributing these products. Collectively, these brands account for less than 
15% of the total number of containers sold under the bottle bill. These brands are responsible, 
however, for more than 90% of the individual product sorts that occur in a typical redemption 
center. 
ln 2019, Maine statute was amended to facilitate the creation of a commingling group for these 
non-commingled brands. Unfortunately, the lack of engagement from these manufacturers 
makes the formation of a separate commingling group for the non-commingled brands 
functionally impossible. Similarly, the DEP has neither the resources nor the wherewithal — 
absent some other partnership - to develop and manage such an entity. 
lt is time for a different and more innovative solution to simplify and enhance the redemption 
process for consumers, and to bring to Maine best practices from other deposit programs. 
Creating a cooperative of commingling groups operated by Maine distributors would eliminate 
sorting and collecting containers by brand. A new commingling group authorized in legislation 
and approved by the Department would usher in a new and significantly streamlined process of 
sorting beverage containers by material type — glass, plastic or aluminum — and the ability to 
invest significantly in new technology to eliminate sorting altogether at some redemption 
centers. lt would also reduce the number of trucks employed by distributors to collect 
containers from the more than 300 redemption centers across our state. 
LD 134 increases the handling fee by ‘A cent on January 1, 2024. We would propose an 
alternative — instead of doing exactly the same thing as was done 4 years ago, which only adds 
more costs to a system that nearly every stakeholder acknowledges needs to be fixed, give 
Maine distributors the opportunity to establish the Maine Commingling Cooperative by that same 
deadline, and end manual sorting by brand. This change would significantly reduce labor costs 
for redemption centers and improve the carbon footprint of the bottle bill. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l’d be happy to answer any questions and will be 
present for the work session."
