Natural Resourres Cantrell of Maine 
3 Wade Street e Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 a Fax: (207) 622-4343 e www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 134, 
An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and 
Redemption Centers 
' 
Sarah Nichols, NRCM Sustainable Maine Director 
March_29, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
speak to you in favor of LD 134 as proposed to be amended by the sponsor. 
Maine’s Bottle Bill is the state’s most effective recycling and litter-prevention program, but 
inﬂation and labor shortages are threatening the viability of Maine’s redemption centers, which 
are key to its success. Redemption centers rely on revenue generated from handling fees—which 
is a statutorily set amount paid to them by beverage companies for each container that is 
redeemed by a consumer. Each time they need to increase revenue to cover the rising costs of 
labor, rent, and utilities so that they can stay in business, they must ask the Legislature to 
increase this fee amount. 
I think it’s worth noting that there is no redemption center association or lobbying ﬁnn to 
represent these small businesses as a group, and they must take the time to self-organize and 
advocate for a handling fee increase every few years or else go out of business. It would be of 
great beneﬁt to them if the handling fee was instead periodically updated to reﬂect inﬂation. 
There is precedent for regular fee increases that reﬂect the inﬂation in other areas of Maine law, 
including but not limited to cost of living increases in the probate code,1 income taxes} and 
retirement beneﬁts for State employees and teachers.3 
We believe that the emergency preamble in the sponsor’s proposed amendment clearly 
articulates the reasons why a handling fee increase is urgently needed. It reﬂects what we have 
heard from many redemption center owners who are questioning whether they can keep their 
businesses open through the busy summer without an increased handling fee. 
We also acknowledge that increasing the handling fee imposes a higher cost to the beverage 
industry, which is why we are working with Representative Allison Hepler on a separate bill that 
seeks to achieve cost efficiencies throughout the program. We look forward to working with the 
Committee to identify a path forward that provides both short-term and long-term solutions that 
will stabilize and modemize Maine’s Bottle Bill. I’d be happy to answer any questions. 
' 
https:1/legisiature.n1aine.gov: ’legis.!statute:s/S l 8-C/title l 8-Csec l ~ l tl8.iunil_ 
2 httpsif/legisiature.maine.govflegis§s ‘tatute:~;f3éititlc36sec5¢t{}3innit 
3 
ljttiisi ﬁflegisiaiuiemaine.govflegisfstatutesf ﬁftitieﬁsee i ’?8O%>.himi
