,r*'l;~.. 
\ ~'s' 
G5) '7‘ /‘ »";" cf‘ 
k.;;§,,Q_;steq.‘ -7 
._.< ,_ =',g>ff- _.‘ 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 134 
An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers 
and Redemption Centers 
Presented to the joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Wednesday, March 29, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Troy Jackson. I serve as President of the Maine 
Senate and proudly represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. I am here today to present an 
amended version of LD 134, “An Act to Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers 
Reimbursed to Dealers and Redemption Centers." 
Maine citizens joined together to pass the “Maine Bottle Bill" at the ballot box in 1978 in an effort to 
curb roadside litter and incentivize the recycling of these materials. But in recent years, redemption 
centers have found it difﬁcult to remain open, jeopardizing the program and leading to decline in 
recycling across the state. This amended proposal seeks to increase reimbursements for the cost of 
handling the beverage container redemption program in Maine. It also would put a process in place 
to streamline the system to meet the needs of season high volume. 
When redemption centers close, it becomes more difficult to redeem the deposit the customer paid, 
which naturally leads to less recycling. According to the Beverage Container Redemption Program 
at the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Mainers recycle approximately 80 
percent of their bottles and cans. This is down from 87 percent.1 This directly correlates to the 
closing of redemption centers. 
According to Maine DEP’s Environmental Specialist, Scott Wilson, there are currently 321 licensed 
redemption centers in the State. This means that 53 redemption centers have shut their doors since 
December 2019.2 A major reason is increased business expenses. These include the cost of labor, 
electricity, and fuel. It is true that all businesses face increasing prices, but owners of redemption 
centers cannot raise their prices to make ends meet. 
1https:[/www.centraImaine.com/2022/07/26/neighborhood-redemotion-centers-becoming~less —common-as-their-numbers- 
decline[ 
Zhttps:5'MlXa\6'iwn ‘tIv1ZQ7f!7f118f5titli17i(102erC$ ’e¢§ll{r§?fBll7\@ ‘-i1€>fli16i’etiel?iQtjgi>31}Eié iiifet-s58l ﬁ13e*a |TYbQ1$$3f3d6 ’nél00nfl}1Ii69/)$086Z"M8 711 
Seizatonlacksonl @gmai/. com * Web Sire: legislature. maine. gov/senate
The owners of redemption centers are on a fixed income set by the State. This is known asa 
"handIing fee." When customers return their bottles and cans, redemption centers pay back the 
customer's deposit. This is covered by the Initiators of the Deposit [IoDs) when they collect the 
containers from the center. The IoDs also pay the “handling fee" as authorized by statute. Which 
brings us to the bottom line —— redemption centers count on the "handling fee" to pay all business 
expenses including labor costs. Simply put, redemption centers will continue to close and 
employees will not earn raises unless the legislature increases the handling fee. The amendment 
before you would increase the redemption center handling fee to $.O575 per container and 
provides for biannual increase based on the federal Consumer Price Index. 
Finally, the amended measure includes a provision to prevent the system from becoming 
overwhelmed following the events of last summer. The increase in volume of containers needing to 
be process coupled with decreased hours and redemption center closures across the state led toa 
perfect storm. This backlog has still not been addressed, which is the reason for the emergency 
preamble. Section 3 of the amendment provides a process for the Maine DEP to waive individual 
beverage container scans if the redemption center implements an alternative method for fair 
apportionment of costs among the parties involved. This section will especially help larger 
processing programs. 
This statutory change is necessary to keep Mainers in jobs, businesses in business, and trash from 
littering our roads and streams. Recycling also helps reduce the amount of waste dumped into our 
landfills. As summer approaches and tourists return to the state, the last thing we need is fewer 
redemption centers, more backlog, and discouraging lines. For these reasons, I hope you will join 
me in support of this bill. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. If you have any questions, I will attempt to answer 
them.
