State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Paula Gravelle, Director of School Finance 
In Opposition of: L.D. 1113 
An Act to Require Transparency Regarding School Construction Spending 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Adams 
Co-Sponsored by: Representative Lavigne 
Date: April 18, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Paula Gravelle, and I am here today representing the Department speaking in 
opposition of L.D. 1113, An Act to Require Transparency Regarding School Construction 
Spending which proposes to require a school administrative unit to produce and make available to 
the public an annual accounting of the use of school construction bond proceeds. In addition to 
the annual accounting, this bill requires a school administrative unit to account for and return to 
each municipality responsible for the debt the amount of any bond proceeds not used to complete 
the school construction project. 
The School Construction Team within the Department collects project accounting records 
throughout the length of a state funded project, then the data is audited and confirmed by the School 
Finance Team to determine disposition of unused bond proceeds. The addition of language to 
produce and make available to the public an annual accounting of the use of school construction 
bond proceeds of a state funded project is likely not necessary given the very strict accounting 
requirements already in place per MRSA Title 20-A, ยง15909 and State Board Rule 61, Rules for 
Major Capital School Construction Projects Section 11. These records are readily available from 
the SAU upon request.
MRSA Title 20-A ยง15909 and State Board Rule Chapter 61 Section 11(7) already require school 
administrative units to use any unused bond proceeds to pay down the bond, both at the local and 
State share levels. Therefore, they cannot also return unused bond proceeds to the local taxpayers. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education opposes L.D. 1113, An Act to Reguire 
Tiansparencv Regarding School Construction Spending_,I am happy to answer any questions the 
Cormnittee may have, and I will be available for work sessions on this bill.
