 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 1113  
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE TRANSPARENCY REGARDING SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION SPENDING  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Victoria Wallack , director of comm unications and government relations for  Maine School Management 
Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and 
Maine School Superintendents Association , in opposition to L.D. 1113.  
 
Our associatio ns are oppo sed to this bill because it does not acknowledge the many checks and balances in the 
school construction process, including review by the School Board, bond approval by the voters, and the 
oversight by the Department of Education Major School Co nstruction Program under Director Scott Brown 
and his team.  Chapter 61 , section  11 outlines the guidelines for financing school construction, section 12 
outlines the guidelines for the bonding of major capit al school construction projects and section  13 ou tlines 
project compliance review by the Department of Education.  Building committees made up of school staff and 
members of the community are involved in the process from start to finish as these projects require 
community input into the location of the ne w project  and the design of the project . Once the design has been 
approved , community members must then vote to approve the bond that will finance the project. A nnual  
accounting of the use of the bonds for school construction is done  annually as required by the  IRS and further 
overview of expenditures for major capital improvements are also done by the school district’s annual audit.  
 
Below is the link to the Major Capital School Construction Programs on the DOE website:  
https://www.maine.gov/doe/schools/facilities/mcscp . 
