Senator Hickman  
Representative Supica  
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee.  
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee.  
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary organization 
dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a world of 
longer, healthier lives. We are testifying in opposition  to LD 839  “An Act to Allow On -premises 
Consumption of Adult Use Cannabis and Adult Use Cannabis Products on the Premises of Cannabis 
Store Licensees ”. This bill would allow for the consum ption of adult use cannabis and adult use cannabis 
products in a designated separate area of a cannabis store as long as certain conditions are met.  Our 
understanding of this bill is that , if enacted, it would allow for  the smoking or aerosolization of can nabis 
in cannabis stores or at least create a conflict in law with our smoke -free public places laws.  
 
The scientific evidence is clear, there is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke. Secondhand 
smoke causes serious diseases and premature death among n onsmokers. That’s why Maine was a leader 
in ensuring that all workplaces and public places  were smoke -free, and we now look for you  to ensure 
that we are  not rolling back our smoke free public places law.  We believe that everyone should have 
the right to breathe clean air, because when people live and work in spaces that are smokefree, they can 
breathe easier knowing that they are not being e xposed to the diseases and risks that come with 
secondhand smoke. Far too many people – especially children and the elderly – are exposed to 
secondhand smoke. This puts them at risk for chronic illnesses like heart disease and cancer. We also 
know that los t productivity caused by diseases that result from secondhand smoke exposure is 
estimated at $5 billion every year. Secondhand smoke exposure is declining, but more than 20% of 
nonsmoking adults in the U.S. are still exposed to secondhand smoke.  Preserving  our smoke -free laws 
will help those who want to quit by providing them with public environments free from any pressure or 
temptation to use tobacco.  
 
Marijuana should be carefully integrated into comprehensive tobacco control and prevention efforts, 
including comprehensive tobacco free laws in public places  and we support  inclusion of marijuana in all 
comprehensive smoke -free air laws. Particul ate levels from marijuana smoke are higher than tobacco 
smoke. The average PM2.5 emission rate of pre -rolled marijuana joints is 3.5 times the average emission 
rate of Marlboro tobacco cigarettes.  Exposure to fine particulate matter can cause cardiovascula r 
disease, lung irritation, asthma attacks and makes respiratory infections more likely.  Smoking marijuana 
in indoor places exposes the public and worker s to dangerous secondhand smoke emissions and creates 
a social justice issue for those employees who may be exposed in their work environments .  
Thank you for your consideration for this critical matter. Please let me know if you have any questions or 
concerns.  
 
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director  

