March 12, 2023
Esteemed members of the Veteran’s & Legal Affairs Committee – 
My name is Heather Sullivan, I’ve been working in the legal marijuana industry for a large multi-state 
cannabis company in compliance, licensing and the real-world impacts of the laws and regulations our 
industry is required to work within. In this role, I have the benefit of seeing different regulations and 
laws across all states with a legal cannabis market, including consumption-lounge laws in Nevada, 
California, Massachusetts, Illinois and other states. 
As you are aware, the initial citizens initiative that voters passed in 2016 included a provision for 
allowing consumption lounges in Maine, but the Joint Committee that reworked that law in 2017 stuck 
safe consumption spaces from the law because there were not enough other states allowing it at the 
time.  It was simply too ‘new’ for Maine.  
After 5 years, I think we can all agree that we now have a  successful, vibrant and growing adult-use 
market in Maine, and I believe it is time to bring the voters what they approved by adding consumption 
lounges to Maine’s landscape.  
Representative Williams, a legislator that has always supported the cannabis industry in Maine, has 
brought forth a clean, simple and easy to understand proposal for providing cannabis consumers with 
the same type of space available to drinkers, cigar smokers and bingo players – somewhere for us to 
interact with likeminded folks in a safe and controlled environment.  Personally, as a single woman of a 
certain age, the idea of there being a place that I could safely meet potential suitors and get to know 
them over a good conversation and a joint feels a lot safer than meeting in a alcohol-filled bar. 
This bill, as written, does present some limitations that I’d prefer were not included.  But it does allow 
Maine to “dip out toes” in the consumption lounge space; provide somewhere for renters, visitors and 
parents to consume cannabis outside of their own homes.  For that reasons, I ask the VLA to consider 
voting this bill “ought to pass”. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
Sincerely, 
Heather Sullivan
62 Bar Mills Road, Hollis Maine
 
