March 13, 2023  
 
 
Maine State Legislature  
Veterans and Legal Aﬀairs Committee  
19 Union Street  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
 
RE: LD 839 
 
 
Good Morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supi ca and distinguished  members of the Veterans and 
Legal Aﬀairs committee : 
 
My name is Matthew Bayliss, I’m a resident of South Portland. I have been a registered caregiver for ten 
years and I was the first adult  use cultivation licensee two and a half years ago.  
 I’m before you today to testify neither for nor against LD839. I am in support of the creation o f an on-
premise consumption license type for adult  use cannabis as well as medical use. I believe that the scope of 
this bill,  however, is too narrow in that it only allow s for on-premise consumption  at adult -use retail 
locations. Right now, there is a consolidation of power with retail licensees,  and many are preventing 
market access  to small Maine businesses. I would not support any measure that would further empower 
and consolidat e market share within these license types.  
 
On-premise consumption of adult -use cannabis is the logical next step in expanding our $150,000,000 a 
year industry and combating the codified stigma that our industry battles on a daily basis. Right now, there is no legal m eans for a tourist to consume adult -use cannabis in Maine and that needs to be 
addressed, rectified,  and supported by OCP, the office of the a ttorney general , and the e xecut ive branch. I 
believe Maine should follow Colorado’ s model of on -premise consumption which allows for stand- alone 
clubs, as well as an a dd-on for busines ses like coffee shops, music venues, restaurants, and cannabis 
retailers.  
 
There is no logical reason why cannabis should be treated any differently than alc ohol in Maine. 
Unfortunately, OCP and this a dministrati on cont inually br oadcas ts a message that  if you have anything to 
do with cannabis pe rsonally or professionally, you will be  treated like a second- class citizen.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to te stify today and I would be happy to answer any questions from the 
committee  members.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Matthew K . Bayliss  
Gele Business Owner / Operator  
Gele , LLC  
9 Industry Rd  
South Portland , ME 04016  
matt@gardenofgele.com  
 
