My name is Rebehak Jackson. I am a Maine resident and I am one of the owner of Brilliant 
Buds. Brilliant Buds operates an adult use cultivation facility in Bethel, Maine and will have 
active adult use cannabis store licenses for a location in Bethel, Maine and a location in 
Auburn, Maine within the next few months. 
Brilliant Buds strongly supports licensed retail stores being able to offer onsite consumption with 
appropriate safety measuresand municipal approval. However, it appears from the language of 
the LD 839, that, if this bill were to pass as drafted, onsite consumption would only be allowed 
inside the building where the retail stores licensed premises is located. We would propose 
broadening the scope of the bill to allow for onsite consumption in an enclosed outdoor area on 
the same property as the licensed premises that is not visible from a public roadway and subject 
to the same security requirements as the retail store. With the exception of security and 
ensuring that the area is not visible, this model would be similar to a beer garden or outdoor 
consumption onsite at a brewery; popular businesses in the summer when people in Maine 
want to be outside. Outdoor onsite consumption would offer an alternative outdoor, social 
experience for those that do not consume alcohol. Additionally, outside venues for onsite 
consumption are recognized by groups such as the American Nonsmokers ’ Association, as 
preferable to indoor onsite consumption. 
Specific to Brilliant Buds, our adult use cannabis store location in Auburn is on a large parcel of 
property that runs along the Androscoggin River. This area of the property is setback from the 
road and has ample parking. We are already in discussions with the Town of Auburn around 
the prospective economic development opportunities for the remainder of the property, such as 
a music venue in the summer or bi-weekly farmers market. Since there will be a licensed 
cannabis retail store on the property as well, it would be a perfect option for outdoor, onsite 
consumption. 
We are hopeful that you will consider amending the language of LD 839 to allow both indoor 
and outdoor onsite consumption on the property where the licensed premises is located with 
proper security and municipal approval. 
22739861 .vl
