122 State Street , Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to : 
LD 839: An Act to Allow On -premises Consumption of Adult Use Cannabis and Adult Use Cannabis 
Products on the Premises of Cannabis Store Licensees  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Monday, March 13, 2023  
 Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association . 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously. 
 MPHA is in opposition to LD 839: “ An Act to Allow On -premises Consumption of Adult Use Cannabis and 
Adult Use Cannabis Products on the Premises of Cannabis Store Licensees .” This bill would allow for the 
consumption of cannabis an d cannabis products in the venue where the products were purchased.  
 We have previously shared our concerns about cannabis testing, specifically edible cannabis products. Studies from Washington State show clear and systematic differences within results pr ovided by cannabis testing 
facilities, even when controlling for confounding factors.
1 A 2019 audit  of Oregon’s testing system found that 
the state’s testing program “cannot ensure that test results are reliable and products are safe” and “[l]imited authority, inadequate staffing, and inefficient processes reduce OHA’s  ability to ensure Oregon marijuana labs 
consistently operate under accreditation standards and industry pressures may affect lab practices and the accuracy of results.”  
 In addition to variability in the  accuracy of testing the content s of these products, there is  variability in the time 
to feel the drug’s effects ; as such, we are concerned about consumers leaving the venue “under the influence” 
without realizing it.  Indeed, t here are currently problems associated with adult cannabis use in Maine. For 
exam ple, in 2020, in Maine, there were 5,625 cannabis -related emergency department visits, a 21% increase 
from 2019.
2 Rates were disproportionately higher for males and for people ages 18 to 25 years old. We are 
concerned this will get worse with the addition of cannabis social clubs.  Furthermore, as we stated in our testimony for LD 83
, at a fundamental level, we also have concerns about the 
health impacts of smoking cannabis and second- hand cannabis s moke exposure. Indeed, there are carcinogens 
122 State Street , Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  in cannabis smoke; these pose health risks to the person smoking and to others in proximity. According to the 
U.S. CDC , “smoked marijuana delivers THC and other cannabinoids to the body, but it also delivers harmful 
substances, including many of the same toxins and carcinogens (cancer -causing chemicals) found in tobacco 
smoke, which are harmful to the lungs a nd cardiovascular system.” These toxins include mercury, ammonia, 
cyanide, lead, and formaldehyde, as well as hazardous fine particles. If smoking were to be allowed, then 
servers and other consumers would be exposed to these substances. In 2003, Maine bec ame the fifth state in the 
country to pass comprehensive smoke -free laws, including prohibiting smoking in bars and lounges; that was 
the right decision then, and continues to be now.  
 
Given these public health concerns , we are in opposition to this bill. Over the past two years , policymakers have 
approved legislation that  has increased access to cannabis products, with off -premises sales and home delivery,  
among other provisions. We are concerned that this is another way to increase access, without concurrent investments in improving product testing, and support ing enforcement and consumer education.  
 Thank you for considering our testimony.  
 
1 Jikomes, N., Zoorob, M. The cannabinoid content of legal cannabis in Washington State varies systematically across testing fa cilities 
and popular consumer products. Scientific Report.  8: 4519 (2018).  
2 Marijuana Use Dashboard . Maine State Epidemiological Outcomes Workgroup.  
