Baldacci Law S—4.*vv|r\q Pﬁclrve Slnae IQQY Joe Baldacci <jbaldacci@baldacc|law com> 
LD 451 
Joe Baldacci <jbaldacci@baldaccilaw.com> Thu, Mar 16 2023 at 9 58 AM 
To: Joe Baldacci <jbaldacci@baldaccilaw.com> 
LD 451, An Act to Ensure Transparent and Accountable 
Temporary Nurse Agencies 
I am pleased to sponsor LD 451, An Act to Ensure 
Transparent and Accountable Temporary Nurse Agencies. 
Temporary Nurse Agencies, also known as Staffing 
Agencies, provide temporary health care workers (including 
but not limited to RNs, LPNs, CNAs) to health care facilities 
in need of staffing support. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, many health care 
organizations in Maine faced critical staffing shortages and 
turned to agency staffing to fill those gaps. 
The staffing shortages across multiple health care sectors 
continues and reliance on agency staff to fill positions has 
grown, often at significantly elevated rates for these‘" 
temporary workers. However, the exact impact, including 
the serious financial effects, are largely unknown. The goal 
of this legislation is to create greater financial transparency 
and accountability. 
Presently temporary staffing agencies do not have to 
update their contact information in a timely manner if there 
is a change of ownership, operation or location. LD 451 
would change that and create greater transparency of 
ownership. lt would also raise the annual registration fee to 
$1000. 
LD 451 would require that temporary nurse agencies 
ensure that each employee it refers to a health care 
provider for a position meets the state and federal 
qualification requirements for that position, and maintains 
records to that effect. 
This bill would also prohibit agencies from 
requiring employees to recruit other employeesto cometo
work for the temporary agency as a condition of 
maintaining their employment. 
And ﬁnally, this bill would require temporary nurse agencies 
to submit an annual report to the Department of Health and 
Human Services, which is then required to submita 
summary report to this Committee- the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services no later than 
December 6, 2023. 
Simply put, LD 451 creates greater transparency and 
accountability for temporary staffing agencies. These 
agencies comprise a significant and growing portion of our 
general fund tax payer dollars used to fund health care in 
Maine. As the stewards of those funds it is incumbent on us 
to have a clear understanding of how agencies are using 
those public dollars. For this reason l hope my colleagues 
will join me in supporting this legislation. 
%‘ 
Joseph M. Baldacci, Esq. 
Law Ofﬁce of Joseph M. 
6 State Street, Suite 605 
P.O. Box 1423 
Bangor, ME 04402-1423 Baldacci, Esq. 
Phone: (207) 945-3333 / Fax: (207) 942-8271 
www.Ba|dacciLaw.com 
contact@baldaccilaw.com 
Baldacci Law Sc-rvlng Heine Since W91 
The information contained 
dissemination, distribution 
your system and ﬁles. in this e-mail communication may be conﬁdential and legally privileged and is for the use of the intended recipient 
only. If you are not the intended recipient, or an authorized employee or agent responsible for delivering it to the intended recipient, the 
or reproduction of this communication or its contents (including any attachments) is strictly prohibited If you have 
received this communication in error, please notify us immediately by telephone or reply e-mail and permanently delete it and any copies from
t.
