Q 61 Winthrop Street * Augusta, NIEE 04330 
"l~8OQ~499~U229 ' Fax 20.7-621 G599 
1 lviztiitc 5. xl;_z~'l' t>t‘m (la ‘P 
oivtsupsmpln P 1't*»g1:'z1rn 
LD 451; An Act to Ensure Transparent and Accountable Temporary Nurse Agencies 
IN SUPPORT 
March 16, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laura Harper, and I am a Senior 
Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. I am here today to present testimony in support of this 
legislation on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program. 
This bill requires temporary nurse agencies to renew registration annually and to update the 
registration if there is a change in ownership, operation, or location. It increases the cost for 
registration from $25.00 to $1 ,000.00. Additionally, it requires that temporary nurse agencies 
ensure that each employee it provides for a position meets the state and federal requirements 
for the position. It prohibits agencies from requiring employees to recruit other employees. It 
requires temporary agencies to submit an annual report to the Department of Health and 
Human Services that must also be provided to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Sen/ices. 
Both long-term care facilities and hospitals have been hard hit by the pandemic. The direct care 
workforce shortage has reached crisis levels impacting access to care across the continuum of 
long-term services and supports. Providers are struggling to recruit and retain nurses, CNAs, 
and other personnel. A Maine Health Care Association survey of its members in December 
2022 indicated that 24% of respondents had 20 or more staff openings. Staffing challenges for 
long-term care facilities continue to limit access to admission. The Ombudsman Program has 
received an increasing number of referrals for assistance from older and disabled adults 
seeking help with admission to both nursing homes and assisted housing. In fact, in both these 
settings in FY 22, this was the second most frequent complaint received by the program. 
There are few things more important to older and disabled residents in long-term care facilities 
than the staff who provide their care. Consistent stafﬁng is a best practice because it allows staff 
to know well the residents they are providing care for. Staff who are familiar with residents are' 
If i\/lLTCOP@Iv'laineOmbudsrnan org
more likely to pick up on subtle changes in their condition requiring attention that might 
otherwise be missed. It is reassuring to residents when they know the staff providing their care. 
Additionally, it fosters communication about resident centered care planning and team building 
among staff who have the opportunity to work together consistently. Unfortunately, the staffing 
shortage has made this goal difficult or impossible to attain. In order to meet the needs of 
residents, providers have increasingly had to find staffing through temporary nurse agencies. 
Nursing home regulations require these facilities meet minimum staffing ratios in order to 
provide sufficient staffing with the appropriate competencies to assure resident safety and attain 
or maintain the highest practicable level of mental and psychosocial well-being of each resident. 
These standards of care apply to all long-term services and supports settings. 
In order to protect and promote the quality of care provided by temporary nursing and other 
direct care staff, it is critical that temporary nurse agencies meet the standards required by this 
legislation for screening regarding credentials, work experience, training and background 
checks for staff that long-term care facilities and hospitals must also meet. These requirements 
are critical in order to promote the quality of care that residents have the right to receive. Any 
long-term care facility or hospital should have the reassurance that the temporary staff they are 
provided with are well qualified to meet quality standards. 
Transparency regarding temporary agencies can be achieved through annual reporting 
submitted to the Department of Health and Human Services and to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. This will provide information that will allow data 
collection regarding the settings and frequency of the use of agency staff, the costs for staffing, 
the wages paid to temporary staff, and documentation of background checks. It will also allowa 
review of the impact of the use of agency staff on quality of care. 
We urge your support for this important legislation. Thank you for your consideration. 
www.rnair;eornbudsmanorg
