LeadingAge Maine & New Hampshire • PO Box 154 • Newmarket NH 03857 • (603) 292- 6441 • www.LeadingAgeMENH.org    
 
Testimony of Lisa Henderson ,  
Executive Director of L eadingAge M aine & New H ampshire  
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services  
March 16, 2023 at 2:00 pm  
In Support of LD 451 -  An Act to Ensure Transparent and  
Accountable Temporary Nurse Agencie s 
 
 Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of  the Joint S tanding 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  
 My name is Lisa Henderson , and I am the Exe cutive Director of LeadingAge M aine & New H ampshire , 
which is an association of mission -driven providers of housing and long -term care for older adu lts in 
the two states. We represent 25 not -for-profit providers in Ma ine, including nursing homes, 
residential care facilities and senior l iving commu nities . 
 
I am speaking today in support of LD 451  - An Act to Ensure Transparent and Accountable Temporary 
Nurse Agencie s. 
 
A persistent ly tight labor market , combined with burnout and fatigue after three stressful years of the 
COVID pandemic , continue s to put a strain on provi ders. At any one time, our members report 20% or 
more  of their positions are open, with no vi able applicants  to speak of.  
 
Providers who have never needed to use staffing agencies  in the past are now fo rced to do so to 
ensure  resident s recei ve necessary  care.  
 
Our members are digging deep to cover the cost of staffing agency personnel —paying two, three, or 
more times as much per hour as they would for full-time employees.  The behavior of some agencies 
is frankly predatory. There is no transparency or accountability regarding why they charge what they 
do, other than they see  a lucrative business  opportunity in the form of desperate providers.  
 
While LD 451 does not di ctate what staffing agencies can charge, it’s time to shed some light on 
potentia lly unfair bus iness practices.  
 
  
 
 

LeadingAge Maine & New Hampshire • PO Box 154 • Newmarket NH 03857 • (603) 292- 6441 • www.LeadingAgeMENH.org    
 
 
Transparency about costs is a critical step in the right direction.  The bill would require temporary 
nurse agencies to disclose : 
 
• The total number of employee placements, where employees were placed, how long they 
were placed ; 
• The total and average amount charged for each category of health c are employee providing 
services ; 
• The total and average amount of wages paid to each category of health care employee for 
providing services ; 
• The total and average amount of stipends paid to each health care employee ; and  
• Documentation of appropriate credentia ls for each employee  
 
Such oversight is well in line with laws in other states working to ensure fair practices among staffing 
agencies , including Iowa,  Missouri, Colorado, Oregon, Kentu cky and Del aware . (It is interesting to 
note that t hese states in clude both R epublican and Democratic ally controlled  legislatures. )  
 Because it is public dollars that largely fund long -term care (i.e. MaineCare), it is in the public interest 
for there to be transparency in this industry. MaineCare dollars are propping up these profit -
motivated agencies . Mean while, widening shortfalls between the cost of care and reimbursement are 
causin g providers to shutter wings or  close  admissions altogether. It is consumers who can’t access 
care when they need it who ultimately  pay the price.  
 In summary, p roviders and MaineCare sho uldn’t be held hostage by  staffing agencies willfully taking 
advantage of Maine’s workforce crisis . The State of Maine deserves accountability for MaineCare 
dollars flowing to  temporary nurse agenc ies.  
 LeadingAge M aine & New Hamps hire urges pass age of LD 451 . 
 
Sincerely,    
 
Lisa Henderson  
Executive Director  

