Lori Pomelow
Lewiston
LD 451
I am writing to request that you support LD 451 - An Act to Ensure Transparent and 
Accountable Temporary Nurse Agencies.
I am Lori Pomelow, both a Registered Nurse and a Nursing Home Administrator. I 
have been a long-term care employee in many different nursing and leadership 
capacities (beginning as a nurse's aide and working my way to becoming the 
Administrator), at Russell Park in Lewiston. I am now in my 25th year at Russell Park
, this year.  
Direct Care workers are the essential employees to care delivery for our residents as 
their eyes, ears, and voices. 
We need all of our direct care workers and more to provide quality of care-but also must be 
able to afford the staff our residents so desperately deserve. 
Russell Park had gone from 2002 to November of 2020, without the use of any staff agency. 
When our home had the first Covid Outbreak, we had to remove 35+ employees all in one 
day due to positive Covid test results. This instantly put our facility into crisis staffing. Over the
next 2.5 years, we have gone from having 140+/- employees on payroll to 84 employees 
employed by our facility. 
The increased need for staff from staffing agencies is costing an enormous amount of 
money, c hanges the way staffing and assignments are handled as well as decreases 
the morale in the facility to name a few things the necessary use of agency causes. 
There are changes in the agency staff almost daily which is difficult for the residents to not 
have continuity of care. Orientation is difficult to provide to the changing agency staff (almost 
daily)-time taken away from our resident population. The human factors as well as the 
financial burden of staff agency causes instability in the workplace for staff and residents 
alike.
Please support LD 451 to hold nurse agencies accountable and to help to stabilize the 
staffing in our industry. 
Thank you for your hard work and for reading my message.
Lori Pomelow, BA RN MLA Administrator 
lpomelow@ncaltc.com 
Russell Park Rehab & Living Center
(207) 786-0691 
