Testimony of Wanda Pelkey, Board Chair of Maine Health Care Association and 
CFO of First Atlantic HealthCare 
To the Committee on Health & Human Services 
March 16, 2023 at 2:00 pm 
In Support of LD 451, An Act to Ensure Transparent and Accountable Temporary 
Nurse Agencies 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services. My name is Wanda Pelkey, and l serve as the board chair of the Maine 
Health Care Association and CFO of First Atlantic HealthCare. My company represents 22 nursing and 
residential care facilities across Maine: Saco, Portland, Freeport, Falmouth, Skowhegan, Lewiston, 
Dexter, Dover-Foxcroft, Bangor, Ellsworth, lvlachias, Lincoln, Millinocket, Houlton, Waterville and 
Madawaska. l fully support LD 451 and sincerely thank Senator Baldacci for his sponsorship. 
lf this bill passes it will reveal the windfall profits nursing agencies are gaining at the expense of 
all Maine health care providers. Gauging by business practices I've experienced, l believe staffing 
agencies are unreasonably profiting off a tight labor market for CNAs and nurses. 
If we operated in a free-market system there would be no problem. We'd all increase our 
charges to customers to cover our increasing costs, just like your neighborhood restaurant or grocery 
store. Instead we operate under significant government price control (i.e. Mainecare rates) so we're 
highly dependent on Maine legislators to increase Mainecare rates in a timely manner and with enough 
resources. That's why we come before you every year, asking for more support.
This bill will provide an important step towards slowing cost increases caused by agency abuse. 
l know it's not the full solution. But l hope it will shed light on the price-gouging we've endured over the 
past several years with an eye towards developing solutions. 
Some have said, just pay your own staff what the agencies pay. For our hard-working and 
deserving caregivers, we have. Over the past 4 years (2019-2022) we've increased hourly pay for CNAs 
by 41%. Then simply, agencies did too, and still continue to hire away our staff and re-sell at ever higher 
rates. Over this same period, their hourly rates to us increased by 64% and they're still demanding 
more. Last year in our NFs, our company spent $14 million more on agency workers than if we'd 
employed them directly. First Atlantic represents about 15% of NF services in Maine and that combined 
with all hospitals, home health agencies, etc that face similar pressures may provide some sense of the 
economic impact. Help us stop this exploitation, it's unaffordable and leading to facility closures. 
Please support this bill and stop the price gouging. l’m happy to take your questions.
