In Support of  
LD #147 An Act to Increase the Amount of Money Allowed to Be Raised for a Charitable 
Purpose by Certain Raffles  Presented by Senator LaFountain of Kennebec  
Written and submitted by:  
Cory King, Executive Director of the Southern Midcoast Maine Chamber (dba 
Bath -Brunswick Regional Chamber)  
…. 
Good afternoon  Sen. Hickman, Rep. Supica and the  esteemed  members of the Veterans 
& Legal Affairs Committee:  
Our chamber is in full support of Sen, LaFountain’s proposed LD #147 because this 
expands the amount of money that can be raised for charitable raffles which is a big deal 
for chambers of commerce, and many non -profit and not -for-profit organziations.   
Fundraising is difficult work.  Times are tight and if you ’re a 501c6 or 501c3 
organ ization whose annual budget relies on one or more fundraising events per year, 
having a limit on what you can make is difficult.   
To be perfectly clear, our Southern Midcoast Maine Chamber representing the Bath -
Brunswick region does not have big enough ev ents yet to reach the current limits, but I 
know many of my fellow chambers of commerce and other non -profits do.   Also,  if a day 
comes when our events are large enough, I don’t want to limit our fundrais ing potential.    
At a popular event, a 50/50 drawing can become a tremendous way for an organization 
to make hundreds, if not thousands of dollars.  If our chamber was so b lessed to have 
the opportunity to make over the current thresholds with attendance and engagement of 
local people, we would love that.  Doubling those thresholds certainly helps us , were that 
situation to arise. For our partners around the state that  alrea dy do have 
events so successful that these limits are capping their potential 
fundraising , we would hope the committee would see the value in providing 
them with a raise to that cap.    
The biggest concern for the current limits  for us  right now is our Mid coast Tree Festival, 
which finished it’s 4th year in November.  We had 41 business -sponsored tree spaces 
with over $44,000 in combined gifts and prizes that were raffled off.  You can’t imagine 
how heartwarming it is to see a family win $500 - $4000 in gifts one month before the 
holidays - especially for families who never could have afforded these items on their 
own - a family who won a camping set this year is a great example .  Often these winners 
will keep the prizes they want, and then re-gift the rest  to family and friends saving them 
from buying presents that year.  It’s  great  exposure and increases sales  for the local 
businesses too.   
If our tree festival expands to over 50 trees next year (which is likely) I could have 10-15 
tree spaces who want to  offer larger packages like heating oil vouchers, living room 
furniture, skis, guitars or other higher -end items, which could take a big chunk out of 
that $75,000 limit.  If we had 15 of the 50 spaces offer  $3,000 tree spaces, that’s $45K 
in value, leaving  just $30K remaining for the other 35 tree spaces.  I would then have to 
tell those 35 tree spaces “I’m sorry you have to keep your tree space value to $860, 
sorry.”    
Bumping this raffle limit up to $125,000 allows for us to let those potential 
50 tree s paces to offer the amount of value to the customer that they want, 
and the families in the area are then able to win higher -end items that they 
might not ever be able to afford on their own.  
For those that may think that businesses offering $3,0 00- $6,000  tree space s in gifts  is 
excessive , you have to remember that the value is the retail value not the cost to the 
business.  A living room set with a retail  value to the customer of $2,600 might only cost 
the business  $700 to produce.  A business looking to get exposure at a two -weekend tree 
festival, may think it’s a n easy decision to offer up that living room set in order to get the 
exposure of being at an event with thousands of families over two weekends.   
At the $75,000 limit, the 50 tree spa ces need to max out at $ 1,500  of retail value .   
If you have 60 tree spaces the max for any space is  $1,250  of retail value . 
In looking at some items….  
 
…If our festival brought in five paintings , the value of those could easily be appraised at 
$3,000 to $10,000 apiece.  
….A car detailing package, with four snow tires and oil changes for a year, can run about 
$1,800  in retail value . 
…Each tree space offers a decorated tree (which are included in the value  for that space ), 
if the decorated trees av eraged $200 apiece, then for 50 tree spaces that’s $10,000 off of 
that $75,000 before we get to the first non -tree item.   
The bottom line : expanding the threshold for fundraising events, especially with the 
growing popularity of tree festival raffles in t he State, to $125,000 makes wonderful 
sense.  I t helps the fundraising  organizations , the businesses, the tree winners and the 
entire community.   
Please consider supporting LD #147 as drafted.  
Thank you.   
 
