Testimony of Senator Dave LaFountain introducing 
LD 147, An Act to increase the Amount of Money Allowed to Be 
Raised for a Charitable Purpose by Certain Raffles 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
January 30, 2023 
Senator Hickman, %‘.epresentative Supica and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal. Affairs, my name is Dave LaFountain. l have the honor of representing the good 
people of Senate E.‘ strict 16, including the towns of Albion, Fairﬁeld, Oakland, Waterville, and my 
hometown of Wins aw. Today, l am pleased to introduce my bill LD ‘I47, An Act to increase the Amount of 
Money Allowed to l=e Raised for a Charitable Purpose by Certain Raffles. 
LD 147 is a bill fror. the Mid Maine Chamber of Commerce located in Waterville and the main goal is to 
increase the amou'~t of Money raised for charity through 5{t.l50 raffles. Every year, the Chamber hosts the 
‘Festival of Trees" 1 downtown Watervillei The current laws on the books handicap the potential total 
money raised in this auction increasing the amount of money allowed to be raised would enable 
organizations like t*:e Mid Maine Chamber and similar organizations to bring in greater resources which 
are re-distributed iréo the area through service programs and community events, 
One oi the key reasons to increase the amount of money allowed to be raised is these fund raising events 
require time, energy, and people. Events such as the “Festival of Trees" rely a great deal on the power of 
volunteers. if the limits were increased, it would require one fundraiser to bring in the total amount of 
money needed rather than two or three. This serves two purposes, not asking an aging volunteer 
population to strairi themselves by staffing multiple events and allow these organizations to hit their 
fundraising goal in one event, leaving more time to focus on the needs of their communities. 
Advocates from the Mid lvlaine Chamber of Commerce and Alfond Youth and Community Center in 
Waterville, will tell you what these fundraisers mean to their organizations and how the funds are 
dispersed throughout the community to provide for those in need and empower small businesses that 
play a vital role in our local economy. 
Thank you for allowing me to introduce and speak on this bill today, l am happy to answer any questions 
the committee may have.
