Kimberly Lindlof
Fairfield
LD 147
Chairs Hickman and Supica, and esteemed members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Kim Lindlof and I’m the president and CEO of the Mid-Maine 
Chamber of Commerce. I reside in Fairfield Maine and have served in this capacity at 
Mid-Maine Chamber for nearly 22 years. Our Chamber represents 22 towns and 
approximately 650 businesses and nonprofits in the greater Waterville area.  In that spirit, I’m 
joining you today to lend my support to LD 147 which would expand the fund-raising 
capacities from $75,000 to $125,000 for events like the regional festivals of trees of which we 
work with our local Alfond Youth and Community Center, as well as to increase 50/50 raffles 
from the current $5000 a day to $10000 a day.  
Local businesses receive unprecedented amounts of exposure by putting trees into these 
festivals, as thousands of people view them annually.  The excitement from winners is 
astounding, and in the end everyone is a winner – the goodwill from the businesses, the 
winnings to the lucky ticket holder, and the State of Maine which collects taxes on the value of
the winnings from these trees.  Moreover, the sponsoring organization received proceeds 
from the event to help support its mission.  In the case of AYCC, it funds it after school meals 
program and weekend backpack program.  The community good will that these events create
can’t be stressed enough – they kick off the holiday season in spectacular fashion and 
provide joy too many.  In our case, because we provide so much volunteer labor and support,
AYCC provides half the net proceeds to the Mid-Maine Chamber to advance workforce 
development initiatives in our region.  To that end, we have strengthened our outreach 
towards the unemployed and underemployed in order to strengthen our members.  
Thank you for your consideration of our legislation to advance this system where our 
businesses, area nonprofits, citizens and the state all win.  
Respectfully submitted,
Kimberly N. Lindlof
President & CEO, Mid-Maine Chamber of Commerce

