 Testimony of Senator Dave LaFountain introducing 
 LD 147, An Act to Increase the Amount of Money Allowed to Be 
 Raised for a Charitable Purpose by Certain Raffles 
 before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
 January 30, 2023 
 Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
 Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Dave LaFountain. I have the honor of representing the good 
 people of Senate District 16, including the towns of Albion, Fairfield, Oakland, Waterville, and my 
 hometown of Winslow. Today, I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 147, An Act to Increase the Amount of 
 Money Allowed to Be Raised for a Charitable Purpose by Certain Raffles. 
 LD 147 is a bill from the Mid Maine Chamber of Commerce located in Waterville and the main goal is to 
 increase the amount of Money raised for charity through 50/50 raffles. Every year, the Chamber hosts the 
 “Festival of Trees” in downtown Waterville. The current laws on the books handicap the potential total 
 money raised in this auction. Increasing the amount of money allowed to be raised would enable 
 organizations like the Mid Maine Chamber and similar organizations to bring in greater resources which 
 are re-distributed into the area through service programs and community events. 
 One of the key reasons to increase the amount of money allowed to be raised is these fund raising events 
 require time, energy, and people. Events such as the “Festival of Trees” rely a great deal on the power of 
 volunteers. If the limits were increased, it would require one fundraiser to bring in the total amount of 
 money needed rather than two or three. This serves two purposes, not asking an aging volunteer 
 population to strain themselves by staffing multiple events and allow these organizations to hit their 
 fundraising goal in one event, leaving more time to focus on the needs of their communities. 
 Advocates from the Mid Maine Chamber of Commerce and Alfond Youth and Community Center in 
 Waterville, will tell you what these fundraisers mean to their organizations and how the funds are 
 dispersed throughout the community to provide for those in need and empower small businesses that 
 play a vital role in our local economy. 
 Thank you for allowing me to introduce and speak on this bill today, I am happy to answer any questions 
 the committee may have. 
