 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support of  
L.D. 147 An Act to Increase the Amount of Money Allowed to Be Raised for a Charitable 
Purpose by Certain Raffles
 
Chairs Hickman and Supica, and esteemed members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I represent the Maine State 
Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association made up of both large and small 
businesses, here to provide you with my testimony in support of increasing the amount of 
money allowed to be raised for a charitable purpose by certain raffles.
Throughout this great state many wonderful and dedicated people work for organizations 
that help fill in the gaps for families and communities in need. You can find them everywhere 
whether it is my friends at regional chambers, the drivers of economic activity in their area, 
family and children-oriented organizations like the YMCA or United Way, or like myself, a 
board member of an organization that serves veterans and first responders. 
While these organizations serve different needs, they are all tied by two common threads. 
They are passionate about those in their charge and they rely on the generosity of the people and 
businesses in their communities that have the resources to support the mission. To grow their 
impact many of these organizations put on events with raffles and prizes. As the interest in such 
events has grown in recent years the fundraising that occurs, and subsequent community impact, 
has become limited by current regulations. While these organizations are staffed by passionate 
people, putting on additional events to avoid the current ceiling on raffles and prizes creates 
additional costs, labor, time, and energy when there is already little left to spare.
I ask that you give this bill your approval. The people, businesses, and nonprofits that 
play such a vital role in their communities as support systems for economic, social, emotional, 
and physical needs are looking for an opportunity to make an even greater impact. We at the 
State Chamber have always believed in the strength of public and private partnerships. This bill 
represents the public support of the private sector’s positive social impact.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.  
  
 
 
