 
 
YWCA Central Maine  
130 East Ave , Lewiston , ME 04240  
P 207.795.4050   F 207.795.4053  
ywca maine .org  
 May 10, 2023  
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee : 
My name is Amanda Hatch and I join you on behalf of YWCA Central Maine  in Lewiston, Maine.  I am 
here to offer YWCA Central Maine’s support of LD 1726, “ An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by 
Supporting Child Care and Working Families.”  Thank you to President Jackson for sponsoring this 
important bill.  
YWCA Central Maine is a non -profit that provides programming and advocacy in service of our mission 
to eliminate racism and empower women. Our largest program is childcare, through which we 
operate an early learning center that served more than 60 children in 2022.  Of these 60 children, about  
50% utilize d the Maine Child  Care Subsidy Program , 20%  utilized  external  support services such as 
case management or Child Development Services  (CDS ), and 60% identified as race other than white 
alone . We currently  serve families with at least nine different home languages.  
I share these statistics because, despite the volume and diversity of children in our c enter , prior  
investments in the childcare sector have not always i mpacted the YWCA —and ultimately the familie s 
we serve —to the extent the investments were designed.  YWCA Central Maine supports t his bill for 
its clear strategies to  reach  more childcare centers of varied sizes  and operational structures , 
ultimately impacting more children, families, and childcare employees in Maine . LD 1726 is 
comprehensive in its strategies to  make the greatest impact on the childcare sector, meeting 
immediate needs like providing  living wages to childcare employees via monthly stipends  and making 
scholarships available to more families, but also addressing the longer -term implementation of a 
sustainable, accessible, and equitable early childhood education sector in Maine.  
YWCA Central Maine is committed to continuing to find ways to offer accessible, affordable, and 
culturally and linguistically supportive childcare to the families we serve because we  know this is both  
a women’s empowerment  and racial justice  issue. Unsurprisingly, multiple studies have noted the 
disproportionate impact a lack of childcare has on women and low wage workers, roles that are in 
 
 
YWCA Central Maine  
130 East Ave , Lewiston , ME 04240  
P 207.795.4050   F 207.795.4053  
ywca maine .org  
 turn disproportionately held by people identifying with a race or ethnicity other than white alone.1 A 
2022  survey on impacts of COVID -19 reported that 45% of mothers  with children five years old or 
younger who left the workforce  during the pandemic  cited childcare as a major reason, whereas only 
14% of men said the same.2 This survey isn’t an outlier: other repo rts show  that having children lowers 
women’s employment rates, with the highest impact felt by women with children not yet eligible for 
public school – those requiring an accessible , quality  early childcare program.3  
However, we also know that  providing  the care is only one part  of the current crisis in our sector : 
affordability continues to be cited as the number one challenge among parents seeking care.4 
Investments  in childcare , such as those made available through  state  subsidy or scholarship,  are al so 
required to keep  women and caregivers  in the workforce. Yet many childcare programs in Maine do 
not accept subsidies or limit the number of subsidized spots available in their programs. For this 
reason, LD 1726’s focus on improving the accessibility of  the Child Care Subsidy – now 
Scholarship – program  for both families and providers  is central to our support of this bill.  
As a non -profit that does not limit the number of subsidized families we enroll, our budget is 
significantly impacte d by the lower -than -market -rate subsidy reimbursement rates and higher -than -
average administrative burden when compared to private pay families.  In turn, this drastically 
impacts our program resources, including the quality of care  and additional supports  we are 
resourced to provide, what we can afford to pay our staff, and more . As an equity organization, we are 
also concerned with the de -facto segregation this ultimately creates among  early learning centers , 
with disproportionate numbers of subsidized fam ilies attending the same, under -resourced centers .  
 
1 Pew Research Center (2015). Women more than men adjust their careers for family life . Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/short -reads/2015/10/01/women -more -than -men -adjust -their -careers -for-family -
life/  
2 McKinsey & Company (2022). The childcare conundrum: How can companies ease working parents’ return to 
the office? Retrieved from: https://www.mckinsey.com/featured -insights/sustainable -inclusive -growth/future -
of-america/the -childcare -conundrum -how -can -companies -ease -working -parents -return -to-the-office   
3 Center for American Progress (2023). Fact Sheet: The State of Women in the Labor Market in 2023 . Retrieved 
from: https://www.americanprogress.org/article/fact -sheet -the-state -of-women -in-the-labor -market -in-2023/  
4 Center  for American Progress (2019). The Child Care Crisis Is Keeping Women Out of the Workforce. Retrieved 
from: https://www.americanprogress.org/article/child -care-crisis -keeping -women -workforce/   
 
 
YWCA Central Maine  
130 East Ave , Lewiston , ME 04240  
P 207.795.4050   F 207.795.4053  
ywca maine .org  
 YWCA Central Maine also strongly supports LD 1726’s  implementation strategies including the 
care costs estimator tool , integrated data system,  and the establishment of a well -rounded and 
comprehensive chi ld care task force that is representative of varied providers  and experts .  
As a  non -profit operating many programs – many providing additional support services to the early 
childcare family – in a large, aging building in Lewiston, o ur organizational operational costs are 
certainly different  than childcare centers of different sizes or those operating single program s. This 
disparity naturally widens in other geographic markets . Due to  our mission -based commitment to 
keeping care both accessible and culturally / linguistically supportive , our program budgets and 
mission -based measurements of quality do not always directly align with other non -profit childcare 
centers, let alone private and family providers.  LD 1726 addresses these concerns  in its 
implementation plans , strategies for measuring costs and quality, and systems for collecting and 
sharing  data.  YWCA Central Maine therefore supports the full bill and all sections  therein  to 
ensure this plan is accurately reflective and supportive  of the sector . 
While the YWCA Central Maine will always  support investments in the childcare sector  that improve 
wages and increase eligibility for subsidy , some  investments  meant to address challenges or barriers  
have not directly  supported  our organization  or the families we serve —and we know we are not alon e 
in this . LD 1726 is an exception . With this bill , there is an  opportunity to make meaningful, multi -
generational  change that will impact children , families , providers, staff , and overall workforce 
development  in every part  of Maine.   
We hope you will vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1726.   
Thank you.  
Amanda Hatch  | Chief Program & Impact Officer  | YWCA Central Maine  
 
