 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of  
LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine ’s Economy by Supporting Child care and Work ing Families  
 
Amy Winston, Senio r Policy Director  
May 10, 202 3 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and honorable  members of the Committee:   
My name is Amy Winst on and I live in Edgecomb . I am testifying  in support of  the childcare  wage  
supplement included in LD 17 26 on behalf of Coastal Enterprise s, Inc. ( CEI). CEI is a nonprofit community 
development corporation (CDC) and community develo pment finance institution (CDFI) . CEI works to 
build a just, vibrant,  and climate -resilient future for people and communities in Maine and other rural 
regions.  We do this by integrating finan ce, business expertise and policy so lutions to make the economy 
work more equitably.   
For 4 6 years, CEI has provided specialized financing and free, sector -specific advice on starting  a 
childcare  business, expanding licensed capacity,  or transition ing a business to a new childcare  provider.  
During this time , we have loaned $13 million to more than 200 family - and center -based  childcare  
business start -ups, including for - and non-profit businesses and cooperatives, that have created or 
retained over 7,200  childcare  slots. Our accrued expertise in this industry has helped care entrepreneurs 
navigate the challenges and opportunities that are unique to this sector  to improve the ir profitability 
and long- term business viability , to create and maintain childcare  slots and quality jobs, and  enable 
more parents to work full time or return to school.  
In 202 0, CEI created the Child Care Business Lab  (CCBL) , a 6-month  group -based  program that pr ovides 
entrepreneurs with the tools they need to open a successful business , from small business start -up 
education  to childcare management instruction  and coaching through the l icensing process . Our curr ent 
class includes  3 cohorts : a family childcare  group, a facility  or center -based childcare  group and a group 
of English language learne rs. To date, 19  Mainers have opened financially sustainable childcare 
businesses servin g over 3 90 children and enabling 83 parents to start full time jobs.  
CEI envisions  a childcare  industry where childcare  providers are educators who are paid a living wage 
and there is  high -quality , affordable ca re available to every Maine child under age 5 . To advance this 
vision, w e partner with the State Office of Child and Family Services , Maine Roads to Quality 
Professional Development Network , Maine Association for the Education of Young Children and Family 
Child Care Association of Maine to  strengthen the childcare ecosystem . We advocate for pragmatic 
solutions that reduce barriers to del ivering high -quality care  and to expand opportunities for people in 
Maine  who are  interested in owning their own childcare  business.   
By continuing – and doubling – the month ly wage supplements that were initiat ed during the pandemic , 
LD 17 26 proposes a pragmatic  process for  retaining and attracting talent to this pro fession.  These 
stipends are integral to retaining teachers  and keeping childc are businesses  open  in a tight labor market . 
Low wages have driven  workers providing child care out of this profession  and forced childcare 
class rooms and entire businesses to close . We would like to thank Senator Jackson  and the sponsors for 
bringing this bill forward. We feel it validates  work that is underway at the Department of  Health and 
Human Services  and Maine Children ’s Cabinet  that will  help the childcare  system  in Maine  to reflect  the 
 
true cost of care and  childcare businesses , which are in the public inter est, to be viable and sustainable 
enterprises . CEI urges the committee to pass the wage supplement provision in LD 1799 . Thank you for 
considering our testimon y. 
 
 
