 
 
To: The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
From:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
RE: Testimony in Support of L.D. 1726, An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child 
Care for Working Families  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, please accept this testimony on behalf of the Maine Community College System and 
our six Early Care and Education Programs in  support of LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by 
Supporting Child Care for Working Families.  
 
Everyone deserves a strong start in life.   
 
Maine’s community colleges are devoted to preparing our students for deeply meaningful work in early 
childhood education professions across the state. Over the past five years, approximately 400 students 
have graduated from our ECE programs and in 2021 -22 academic year, 459 students enrolled in our 
ECE and certificate programs, up 22% from the prior year.  These students and graduates are learning 
how to deliver high quality childcare to Maine’s youngest residents in all corners of our state.  
 
Multiple colleges have on -site child care centers for students, faculty, staff and the wider community. 
This summer , EMCC will break ground on an expanded child care center in East Millinocket, supported 
by $4 million in federal funds. This expansion will allow for hands -on learning while providing 
desperately needed childcare in the Millinocket area.  Southern Maine C ommunity College has an 
NAEYC -accredited center for children ages 3 to 5, which also provides a laboratory setting for students 
in the ECE program. At Kennebec Valley Community College, the Family Lab and Nature Exploration 
Center offers nature -based learn ing and early childhood STEAM activities. The center at Eastern Maine 
Community College offers Head Start services in partnership with Penquis Child Development and 
provides ECE students a laboratory setting. At Washington County Community College, the on -campus 
center offers priority placement for WCCC students and provides internship opportunities for ECE 
students.  
 
However, despite all we are doing, it is not enough.  We educate amazing childcare  professionals, but 
many can’t afford to stay in the profe ssion. This is not because their employers don’t appreciate their 
dedication and hard work ; it is because their employers can’t afford to pay them the wages they need to 
stay in the profession they love without having to charge a rate that the parents in  their communities just 
can’t afford. This is why we support any efforts to offer wage supports, child care subsidies , and 
increases to Head Start and other programs.  
 
It is important to note that these supports would not only impact our ECE students, but many of our 
other students as well. Our students, like many working parents, struggle finding and affording child 
care.  We do what we can with scholarships and our own centers, but we also have limited resources.  
 
We would like to thank Pres ident Jackson for his commitment to the children of Maine and the people 
who educate and care for them every day.  
