 
Testimony of 
Ben Freeman, Member 
Professional Fire Fighters of Maine 
 
LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working 
Families  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Myer and distinguished members of the Committee on Health & 
Human Services, good morning and thank you for the opportunity to appear before this committee 
today in support of LD 1726, “An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for 
Working Families.” 
My name is Ben Freeman, I am a resident of Brookville, a Professional Firefighter/Paramedic 
employed by the Town of Ellsworth and a proud member of IAFF Local 3402 and the Professional 
Fire Fighters of Maine. In addition to representing my own personal interests in the passage of LD 
1726, Michael Crouse, President of the Professional Fire Fighters of Maine requested that I also 
represent over 1,000 Professional Firefighters, Paramedics, EMTs & Dispatchers, especially those 
trying to raise a family in these tough economic times. 
As a father of three (3) small children in a household with two (2) working parents, I can tell you 
firsthand, that one of the largest challenges my family and other working families throughout the 
State face today is access to “reliable and affordable” childcare. Even those families that are 
fortunate enough to afford childcare, it is a continued struggle to find childcare at all. 
As you know, Maine is the oldest state in the country and our available labor pool is almost 
nonexistent. Not having access to childcare keeps Mainers out of the workforce and it makes it 
extremely difficult for people to raise a family here. 
 
For my family, we are fortunate to have access to childcare for most of the week, but not every 
Wednesday as you can see! If I had to work a twenty-four (24) shift or was forced into work for 
overtime or on a call back for a working fire, my wife would have to take Personal Time Off (PTO) 
to take care of our children. Again, we are lucky, at the moment she has some PTO time saved for 
to utilize under these circumstances.  
 
 

There are many other first responder families and other Maine working families that are not as 
fortunate as mine, because if they can’t find childcare and do not have PTO or other work arounds 
to provided childcare, they cannot not work and if they don’t work, they don’t get paid and that 
just adds additional stress on our families.  
 
When we asked our members, we heard back that childcare is a real problem for their families.  
The cost, the limited schedules, and the lack of spots all are clearly a big issue facing fire fighters 
across Maine.  
 
LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families is a 
small step to incentivize more of Maine’s people to seek careers in the childcare industry and 
ensure that Maine’s working families finally have access to reliable & affordable childcare. 
 
As you will no doubt hear in other testimony during this important hearing, I also believe that LD 
1726 will also provide an economic gain for our state, by getting more people in Maine’s 
workforce. 
 
So, on behalf of my family, the families of our 1st Responders and all of Maine Working Families 
my family and the PFFMaine strongly urge your support and vote for the passage of LD 1726. I 
am happy to answer questions that you may have and would make myself available during the 
work session should the committee so desire. 
 
Respectfully Submitted on this day, Wednesday, May 10th, 2023. 
 
Ben Freeman, Member 
IAFF Local 3402 & the Professional Fire Fighters of Maine 
 
