 
MAINE 
 
 
 
4 Jersey Circle / Topsham, ME 04086 / 207.725.5946 
 
 
TESTIMONY BY BEN GILMAN 
ATTORNEY, CHAIR MAINE CHILDREN’S TRUST AND MEMBER, READYNATION 
 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEES 
ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1726  
“AN ACT TO BUILD MAINE’S ECONOMY BY SUPPORTING CHILD CARE FOR 
WORKING FAMILIES”  
MAY 10, 2023, 10 A.M. 
 
Chairs Baldacci and Myer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, I am Ben Gilman and I am testifying today wearing many hats: as an attorney, 
former General Counsel to the Maine State Chamber of Commerce , Chair of the Maine 
Children’s Trust , and father of four children ages 8-18 years old. I am also a member 
of ReadyNation , a national nonprofit made up of business leaders who want to improve the 
current and future workforce through investments in early childhood programs. We believe 
that public investments in high-quality early learning programs—specifically child care—are 
foundational to growing Maine’s workforce and economy. 
  
Research shows that high-quality early learning programs help prepare our future 
workforce. These programs achieve this goal by developing the foundation of academic and 
other skills in our youngest learners.   
  
This Committee is dealing with a myriad of child care legislation this session because, 
frankly, Maine’s child care industry is on the verge of imploding. That puts our businesses 
and workforce at great risk. We learned during the pandemic that businesses need reliable 
child care.  Without it, employees who are parents can’t work. That makes helping fix 
employees’ barriers to high-quality child care a priority for business leaders.  
  
What qualifies as quality child care? First, a program’s physical environment must be safe, 
clean, and attractive to children. Classroom materials should stimulate physical and 
cognitive development, and instruction and curriculum should be developmentally 
appropriate. 
  
Most importantly, the child care teachers’ interactions need to be consistent and supportive 
and stimulate learning. Early childhood educators must also be well-trained before they start 
teaching, and they need to receive continuous professional development once they’re on 
the job. Adequate compensation is also key to attracting and retaining top talent. 
  
MAINE 
 
StrongNation.org/ReadyNation 
To provide the level of care and attention needed to facilitate children’s development, child-
to-teacher ratios must be low. Because the child care “day” can be as long as 12 hours, 
programs should also cover the entire day with adequate staff. 
  
The main driver of child-care costs is labor, and Maine child care workers earn low salaries. 
Fortunately, last session the legislature and governor approved the first major General Fund 
support for Maine’s 6,500 child care workers in the form of a $200 monthly wage 
supplement.   
  
As a result, the average wage of child care workers in Maine increased by $1.15/hour—from 
$14.90 to $16.05, which is about $33,000 annually. It’s a good start, but by no means is the 
job finished. 
  
According to a September 2021 report by the U.S. Treasury , child care workers, as a sector, 
are the second-lowest paid in our nation.  
 
Think about how $16.05 per hour compares to what we see advertised for workers in fast 
food restaurants, at coffee shops, and in our local retail establishments. 
  
Last year the legislature and governor took a major first step to address these challenges, 
but there is more to do. Fortunately, we have Senate President Jackson’s bipartisan 
proposal before you now seeking to further increase the wage supports for Maine’s critical 
child care workforce and to bring child care teachers’ average median wage closer to the 
hourly wage of other entry-level jobs.  
  
If every Maine family had access to the quality child care they need, we could increase 
workforce participation across Maine and unleash the potential for true economic growth. 
We would also have more people choosing to move to Maine specifically to work and raise 
their children. That’s why it is critical for businesses and families that the child care crisis is 
addressed. I urge this Committee to support the wage supplement increases in LD 1726. 
 
 
