 
Testimony of Brittany Foss  
In support of  
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families 
sponsored by Senate President Troy Jackson 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Brittany Foss. I am an Educator, Supervisor, and a parent of a 
toddler, and I live in Plymouth. I’m testifying in support of LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine’s 
Economy by Supporting Child Care and Working Families. 
 
 
This bill has some great opportunities to help reduce the stress and barriers for many who are 
working in, or accessing early childhood education.  In my role as supervisor,  I see the effect 
that the minimal wages, the long hours, and demanding daily tasks has on the educators that I 
support. Just this week I have 3 staff who are making the tough decision to leave the early 
childhood classrooms for a higher paying job- many leaving the field all together. This bill aims 
to double the monthly wage stipend from $200 to $400 for early childhood educators. This 
increase would help programs to recruit and retain qualified staff that provide care for children 
and support for families.  
 
Along with the wage stipend the bill also creates a committee to look into the cost of care model 
for the state of Maine. This would be a great contribution to better understanding the Early 
Childhood Education field and support a greater community of supporters who can see the true 
costs that come with caring for our youngest children.  
 
Increasing Head Start Eligibility means that we can serve more children and families. This can 
only be seen as a positive thing for our communities. I have personally seen how programs like 
the one that I work in support families in bettering their lives and the futures of their children. 
Families depend on high quality care where they feel their child is safe and well taken care of in 
order for them to succeed in their daily lives whether that is at work or continuing their 
education.  
 
I would be happy to go into more detail or provide more information regarding any of these 
topics, or any related to this bill.  Please vote in support of LD 1726, and show your support for 
the field of Early Childhood Education. The children, families, and educators desperately need 
bills like this to give the structures needed to support them.  
 
 
Thank you!  
Brittany Foss M.S. Ed   
Education Coach/Supervisor  
(207)680-7204 
brittanyf@kvcap.org 
 
