Brittney Grant
Caribou; Maine State Parent Ambassadors Alumni
LD 1726
Hello- My name is Brittney Shields Grant and I am a parent of three children, a Maine
State Parent Ambassador, and a member of the parent board for Miss Jordyn's 
Childcare and Preschool. I am here to testify in support of LD1726, An Act to Build 
Maine’s Economy by Supporting Childcare and Working Families. I'd like to start by 
thanking you for spending so much of your time listening to testimony from parents, 
educators and administrators of childcare centers. High quality childcare is hard to 
come by and expensive when available, though the benefits are abundant. The 
National Association for the Education of Young Child (NAEYC) states that low 
wages are a significant barrier to attracting and retaining qualified early childhood 
educators. Many early childhood educators earn poverty-level wages, which can lead 
to high turnover rates and a lack of stability for young children. This high turnover 
rate has a negative impact on the quality of care that young children receive.(NAEYC 
2021).  According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the median hourly wage 
for childcare workers in May 2020 was $12.24, which is significantly lower than the 
median hourly wage for all workers, which was $20.17. The BLS also reports that the 
annual mean wage for childcare workers in May 2020 was $25,460, while the annual 
mean wage for all workers was $56,310. (BLS 2021). Why does it matter? 
Because as research shows, investing in quality early childhood education can have 
significant long-term benefits, including increased earnings, improved health 
outcomes, and reduced involvement in the criminal justice system. It can also have 
significant economic benefits, including increased productivity, reduced healthcare 
costs, and decreased reliance on social welfare programs.(NAEYC 2021). 
And I know that research is helpful, but researchers aren't the ones writing my story- 
the real life accounts of childcare in the past 5 years. I became a single mom of two 
children in 2018- two daughters, ages 3 and 1. I wasn’t able to secure reasonably 
priced childcare but did not qualify for assistance. The choice was to pay for our food 
and housing, or pay for a childcare center. A stay-at-home mom was able to watch the
girls for me, and I relied heavily on family to watch them as well. I finally located a 
center that could watch them… and here comes the old adage - “you get what you pay
for”. Shortly after enrolling, when going to pick my daughter up for an appointment, I
walked in to discover the provider napping with the youngest children in a dark room 
while the 3-5 year olds were unattended at the kitchen table. We pulled the children 
from that center and Miss Jordyn’s Childcare posted an opening not long after in 
December of 2019. In January 2020, they were able to start attending Miss Jordyn’s, 
but my husband began working extra EMT shifts around his nursing classes to help 
accommodate the price. in March, when the world shut down for COVID, these 
teachers set up Zoom meets with their classrooms.  When it reopened, our children 
were ecstatic to go back to those teachers. 3 years later, we have lost most of their 
favorite teachers. Yes, it might be said that change is natural for many people and the 
employees won’t be there forever. And absolutely, some go on to school based 
positions, but then we see the others at an entry level position- a cashier at a hardware
store, a teller at a bank, a receptionist at a local business. They could get benefits and 
better pay at these positions. They’re not nearly as passionate about paperwork or 
power tools, but they couldn’t afford to live while employed at a childcare center. 
These teachers build relationships so strong they come back to visit. The tear-filled 
goodbyes on teachers last days are enough to rip a parents heart out. Teaching is 
selfless- absolutely selfless. So many teachers and childcare providers are scraping 
by, just to be with our kids day in and day out. Just last week, we got word that the 
after school program is only available 4 days a week due to resignations. In some 
cases, these program closures pull a nurse from an ER, a provider from a orthopedic 
office, or a CNA from a nursing home. And one of those resignations? Another 
favorite teacher. I’m prepping my kids for yet another heart wrenching goodbye. 
Providers need to be able to pay working wages and sustain themselves and parents 
shouldn’t have to work overtime in order to afford childcare. It is in no way just 
parents who suffer, or children, or childcare providers. It is employers. It is hospitals. 
It is small businesses. It is Maine. 
Reference:
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2021). Occupational Employment and Wages, May 2020.
Retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes399011.htm
Reference: 
National Association for the Education of Young Children. (2021). Early Childhood 
Workforce Systems Initiative. Retrieved from 
https://www.naeyc.org/resources/topics/workforce-systems-initiative
Reference:
National Association for the Education of Young Children. (2021). Why Invest in 
Early Childhood Education? Retrieved from 
https://www.naeyc.org/our-work/families/why-invest-early-childhood-education

