Testimony of Chrissie Davis  
In support of   
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families 
sponsored by Senate President Troy Jackson  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee , my name is Chrissie Davis and I am a family childcare provider in 
Skowhegan . I currently work alone and serve 6 children under the age of 5 and 2 school -age 
children.  Although I am licensed for 12 children, I can’t afford to hire a helper to fill those extra 
opportunities.   After filing my taxes this year, I calculated my hourly rate at $11.33.  I have been 
in business for 22 years and work with children 11 hours a day.   After business hours my time 
include s trainings, meetings, record keeping, cur riculum planning, activity prep , meal prep, 
cleaning and sanitizing.   I only take 2 weeks of paid vacation per year and major holidays off.  I 
have no retirement fund and very little savings.   I just love my job.    
 
 
 My program is an Early Head Start part ner and nationally accredited. I work hard to make sure 
the services I provide for children and families are high quality.  Bouncing Bubbles has a Star 5 
rating with Maine’s Quality Rating System and is a Nature Explore Certified Outdoor Classroom.  
I am a n appointed member of the Children’s Cabinet Early Childhood Advisory Council.  In 
addition, over  the past 22 years, I have earned an AS in Early Childhood Education, Maine’s 
Inclusion Credential, Maine’s Youth Development Credential and Maine’s Infant Tod dler 
Credential.  My training has earned a Level 6 on the Career Lattice with Maine Roads to Quality 
Professional Development Network.  All of these increase my knowledge and expertise  in the 
field of early childhood education.   And I could earn more and w ork less hours at Cumberland 
Farms.  
 
As you have probably heard by now, childcare is the workforce behind the workforce.  Without 
reliable childcare, families can’t work and that’s a problem!   While writing this testimony, I 
received a message from a mom o f three children.  She just learned her childcare is closing and 
is desperate to find childcare so she doesn’t lose her job.   She was in tears  and I couldn’t help 
her.   
 
LD 1726 would, among other things, double the current monthly wage supplement to 
$400/month.   That would pay about half of my food costs for the month.   What a help that 
would be!  Another piece of the bill includes adjusting the child care subsidy payments to 
providers on an enrollment basis rather than calculating payme nt on the child’s attendance.  My 
income is based on a weekly fee ; I cannot operate on hourly rates.   That weekly fee holds their 
spot whether they are in attendance for 50 hours or 10 hours in any given week.  The Child Care 
Subsidy Program must continue to reimburse providers on an enrollment basis.   If they revert 
back to the attendance basis as was the p olicy before the pandemic, many providers including 
myself, will be forced to either cut back on the number of subsidy opportuniti es they provide or 
eliminate them altogether and only serve private pay families.    
 
When the State of Maine needed me to remain open and risk my own health and that of my 
family to care for the children of essential personnel, I answered that call.   My business 
remained open t hroughout the pandemic, closing just one week when I had Covid  in 20 22.  I 
need the State of Maine to recognize th e vital role the Early Childhood Educators of Maine play  
in the education of young children and support of the workforce.  Please support LD 1 726.  
Thank you.  
