Testimony offered on behalf of LD1726  
 
Colleen J. Quint  
President & CEO  
Alfond Scholarship Foundation  
Portland, ME  
May 10, 2023  
 
 Senator Baldacci , Representative  Meyer and  members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services .  Thank you for the opportunity to share this testimony with you.  
 
My name is Colleen Quint  and I am the President & CEO of the Alfond Scholarship Foundation.  Our My 
Alfond Grant program awards $500 at birth to every baby born a Maine resident.  To date, over $ 72m has 
been awarded to more than 145,000  Maine children  for their future education a fter high school .  I also 
serve as chair of the Strong Foundations strand of MaineSpark, the initiative that seeks to boost Main e’s 
educational attainment rate for credentials of value to 60% by 2025.   The Strong Foundations strand 
focuses on Maine childre n from birth through 5th grade.  
 
I write today in support of LD1726/SP0690, Senate President Jackson’s Bill:  An Act to Build Maine’s 
Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families.  
 
Making childcare accessible and affordable is of critical importa nce to children’s development, and to 
parents’ ability to participate in the workforce.  And ensuring that early childhood educators earn a living 
wage is essential to creating and sustaining the workforce that supports children and families.  
 
The steps o utlined in Senate President Jackson’s bill are foundational to building the kind of early 
child hood education system that Maine so clearly needs. While many of the elements of the bill take 
positive steps in this direction, I would like to call particular attention to the wage supplements and other 
workforce strategies .  Certainly real progress has been made in this regard over the past several years , 
and this proposal builds off the good work of the Administration a nd the Legislature from last session.   
 
Investing in our early care and education workforce ensures that we have available child care for working 
families. The new salary supplement program uses a tiered system to encourage individuals to earn 
credentials  and degrees, and encourages those who have earned credentials and degrees to stay in the 
field through increased stipends for those with higher levels of education and/or experience.  
 
Having more qualified, trained and experienced educators in early care  and education will improve 
quality . And quality early childhood education is a  critical foundation al issue for our children and their 
future – as well as for our current and future workforce.  
 
Just last week, I stopped at a local Head Start program to drop off some nonperishable items for their 
food pantry.  This particular food pantry is for staff .  Clearly more needs to be done.  
 
As a state, we have taken good and strong steps to support peopl e going into – and staying in – early care 
and education. We need to continue to build on those steps by improving wages and thereby ensuring 
that children, families and the state’s economy has that foundational support.   
 
Thank you for your consideration  of LD 1726.  
