Deborah Arcaro
Gorham
LD 1726
Date: 5-8-2023
Testimony of Deborah Arcaro
In support of LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care 
and Working Families
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee, my name is Deborah Arcaro. I was a state licensed 
family child care provider for 33 years before retiring in July ‘21. I currently 
volunteer for the Family Child Care Association of Maine Professional Learning 
Committee. I’m personally testifying in strong support of LD 1726 An Act to Build 
Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care and Working Families. 
As a sole family child care provider who provided multi-ages care for infant through 
age 12 for 33 years, I know first hand the importance of the service child care 
programs provide for both their individual community’s economy, but also for the 
general state economy. Family child care is an important part of the state’s child care 
system. Many of today’s family child care programs are also employing staff. Child 
care programs are small businesses that provide a service that allows parents of young
children to work. 
I was able to provide a stable income that helped support my family, but I know there 
are staff who would qualify for Maine’s subsidy, as would the provider themselves. 
This Bill supports those individuals being eligible to access the subsidy support that 
those not in the field can. 
I feel strongly that this Bill if passed will make positive steps in supporting the child 
care workforce and availability of quality child care for more Maine families.
Some of my thoughts/reasons:
I appreciate the idea of changing the name of the subsidy program to: The Maine 
Child Care Scholarship Program. I think that better reflects the purpose of this 
monetary support program. Maine wants children to have access to quality programs 
that families can afford. While we understand that providers are not in many cases 
even charging what it truly cost to provide the care. 
Developing a task force that will focus specifically on Maine’s child care system, 
which defines the inclusion of multiple participants that are actively in the field is 
important. Maine’s child care providers are the workforce behind the workforce. They
are essential workers. If the child care system was to collapse tomorrow the 
immediate and long-term negative impact on Maine’s economy would be hard to 
overcome. If you are not directly in the field it can be hard to really understand the 
expansive job that providing child care is. The task force’s duties outlined in the BIll 
address some very important areas Maine needs to consider for building a stronger 
child care system that will meet future needs across Maine, especially considering 
diversity and geographics. 
The Quality child care costs estimator tool needs to be developed and implemented as
soon as possible. The voluntary collection of fees charged by providers has not 
reflected the true cost of care. That true cost is important for supporting a sustainable 
child care system in Maine. It is important for increasing the number of providers who
contract with the program to accept eligible parents.
Reimbursing child care providers that accept child care subsidies based on enrollment
and not attendance is a stabilizing move. We know that from our experiences during 
COVID. 
Any changes to have a quicker process, retroactive payment and quicker notification 
of provider on family eligibility is appreciated. I was contracted with the subsidy 
program for multiple years when I had parents that were eligible. It was not always an
easy program to work with. To engage more providers that needs to change.
The collection of relevant data this Bill includes to review the subsidy program 
changes and impact is important. Barriers cannot be overcome without knowledge of 
them. Successful parts of a program can not be reinforced and grown without 
knowledge also.
I have always believed that children have the right to attend quality programs that 
promote their learning and development. I also believe that affordable access for all 
families to quality child care is essential. Quality programs promote families’ 
self-sufficiency helping then to better provide for the wellbeing of their children. The 
Bill’s stated phased implementation plan with benchmarks for limiting child care 
costs, by 2030, to no more than 7% of a family's income for a family earning up to 
250% of the median family income in the State is a goal worth striving for.
Thank you for your time and attention.

