 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1726-An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care for 
Working Families  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer  and members of the Committee  on Health and Human Services , 
 
I am Eamonn Dundon , Director of Advocacy  for the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce. We represent 
1,300 businesses in our region who collectively employ over 65,000 Mainers. We are submitting this testimony  
today to express our strongest support for  LD 1726 .  
 
We believe the title of this bill is not just  effective marketing , but a true statement. T he investments in the bill 
will build Maine’s economy by supporting  workers and provid ers in the childcare industry, while expanding 
access to high -quality childcare for all working families in our state . I would like to take my time today to walk 
you through why th e lack of high -quality affordable childcare  is such an acute challenge for M aine’s economic 
development prospects.  
 
In 2020 , 2021 and again this year , we worked with Starting Strong, a Portland based coalition focused on 
establishing the building blocks for lifetime learning, to survey our membership and determine  the impact of 
the lack of childcare on the business community in our region. We surveyed businesses from small storefronts 
with a handful of workers up to some of the largest employers in the state and the results were clear: a lack of 
childcare is a significant  impedime nt to hiring, training, and retaining employees and the current programs in 
place are insufficient  to address this overwhelming need.  
 
In fact, 82% of our members report ed that their employees have trouble finding childcare , up from 70% just 
before the pa ndemic in 2020 . This translates into real business impediments that undermine our economic 
development efforts at the state and local level s. 88% of our members reported  that their employees experience 
unplanned work absences due to lack of childcare, and nearly 65% reported  that lack of childcare has caused 
issues with employee retention , up from 46% just one year ago . When we asked our members who identified 
lack of chi ldcare as a problem for their business,  95% cited availability  and affordability as the biggest barriers 
their employees face in finding childcare, both of which are directly addressed by the provisions of this bill.  
 
We cannot to address issues around pro grammatic availability and affordability unless we invest the in the most 
critical component of any system: people. Childcare workers  and businesses in Maine  have been 
undercompensated for decades, despite possessing the degrees and expertise needed to car e for our youngest 
residents. This has led to high turnover and burnout among these professionals, further limiting childcare slots 
and presenting many challenges to those looking to open or expand a childcare program.  
 
For these reasons we ask that you  support these important investments in workers who do so much to hold up 
our economy and Maine families. Thank you for your time today, and, on behalf of the Portland Regional 
Chamber I ask that you please support LD 1726.   
