May 9, 2023 
RE: TESTIMONY FOR LD 1726 – An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care and 
 Working Families 
Points: Child born in June, 2020, three months into pandemic 
 When Pandemic first shut everything down, Mother was attending classes at SMCC and working 
 at small adult care facility.  Mother left that position and went to work in convenience store 
 chain as the convenience chain, along with many businesses that don’t pay well and offer no 
 benefits, did one thing other businesses didn’t offer……the convenience store scheduled 
 employees to work around hours the employees could work.  Mother and child’s Father both 
 worked for convenience store and staggered hours as best they could to take care of baby. 
 It’s important to note that Mother went back to work when little one was three weeks old.  
 There was no maternity leave and monthly rent for a studio apartment was $1200 monthly, plus 
 utilities.  
 From the very beginning, I took care of the baby on week days and evenings when schedules 
 overlapped.  Child’s grandparents covered weekend days when Mother was scheduled and it 
 over-lapped on Father’s schedule also.  I drove from Springvale to Kennebunk, 25 minute drive, 
 sometimes leaving my home as early as 4am.  Eventually couple found a larger rental in 
 Springvale, with actually 2 bedrooms and that made commuting easier for me.  But Mother 
 became a single parent soon after, leaving her with a rent she couldn’t afford and needing to 
 work even more hours.  But we were still coming out of pandemic and day care rates were 
 continuing to soar and openings, even if they would have been available,  were scare.  So many 
 facilities closed due to COVID. 
 Eventually the Mother found a cheaper rent and a weekly schedule evolved with me doing three 
 week days, my daughter-in-law doing two week days, and grandparents doing Saturday.   
 A life “reality” occurred in February-March, 2023.  I needed to have cataract surgery on both 
 eyes.  First surgery was late February and next was scheduled in mid-March.  After each surgery 
I  was advised to not lift child or even take care of her for a couple of days.  Daughter in law 
 stepped in to cover for me.  But in between surgeries I got a really bad cold and couldn’t take 
the  little one.  It became immediately apparent to Mother that she needed a job that would also 
 provide her with a way to get little one in childcare.  She had set a goal for herself to have this 
 happen in June, 2023, when child turned three. 
 Luck was on her side and she found a position in a child care facility that would be able to take 
 our little one when she turned three.  Within a week of starting her position at this facility, they 
 found a place for the little girl and she now goes to work with Mommy every day.  Her Mother 
 has weekends off so Auntie and I lost our “jobs”.  But, when child is sick, which has happened a 
 lot since starting day care and physicians have assured the Mother that children “build up 
 resistance”, I now take little one when she is not feeling well, running a fever, has ear infection, 
 etc.   
Child care is a temporary need but without child care, parents are held back from attaining better paying 
positions, from attaining positions that offer health insurance, sick time (real sick time!), and  to be able 
to afford time with their children.  But more about THIS!  
Other Side’s Points – 
 Child care providers are taking care of our most precious “possessions” for lack of a better word!  
As stated in LD1726, child care ranks in the bottom 2% in the employment sector.  This is a real black 
mark on our society.  The entire workforce depends on workers being able to be on their jobs when they 
are needed and expected to be.  Child care should be ranked far higher in the employment sector, for 
the very role it plays in our families and our communities.  Parents trying to maneuver in this 
environment at a time in their lives when they are also trying to enjoy their families and be responsible 
and do the very best they can by their children, are sometimes barely holding on in a catch 22 situation.  
We need to look at both sides of this situation and do the best we can for both.  LD1726 is a start.  
It's been wonderful to have found myself, as a GREAT grandma, to be in good health and in a position to 
have been able to help my granddaughter, the Mother.  I retired just before the pandemic shut down 
businesses, schools, etc. and God/Fate put me, and my daughter in law, little girl’s Auntie, in positions to 
be able to help and be such important parties in a soon to be three-year-old’s life.  I’m 77 and Auntie 
suffered a debilitating stroke a few years ago at a pretty young age for such an incident.  We both feel 
blessed for our parts! 
 
 
 
