Emily Short
Lancaster, NH
LD 1726
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Emily Short. I am the 
Director of Sunnybrook Montessori School, and I live in Lancaster, NH. I’m 
testifying in support of LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting 
Child Care for Working Families.
There are many reasons I stand before you today, but I will start by telling you a bit 
about myself. In July 2020, at the height of the covid-19 pandemic, my family moved 
to Chebeague Island, Maine from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. I became the Director and
Lead Teacher of Kids Place, a small center for year round families. My experience, 
love of children, and not so typical lifestyle made it too appealing to pass up. I 
assured my family they would love Maine, the opportunities, the schools, the 
“Maniacs” ,and the experiences. I can say with certainty they absolutely did. 
Personally, I did too. Unfortunately, after a few short years we had to make the 
decision to leave the home and center we fell in love with, or chance being homeless. 
This sounds extreme, however, our system is broken. As the highest paid employee, 
with thousands of hours of training, education, and experience, I made $17 an hour.   
Quoting directly from Maine Kids Count Data Book “In Maine in 2020, the estimated
living wage was $26.48 per hour  for one parent to support one child. By counties in 
Maine, this varied from $24.86 per hour in Franklin County to $34.79 in Cumberland 
County.” I lived in Cumberland county.  Our little island center tried to help, they 
offered me  a $2.00 raise to $19.00, then I lost my insurance.  My family lost their 
insurance. As an educator, with an auto-immune disease, two children, and a spouse 
with diabetes, we could not afford our home, insurance, and child care. With the 
limited number of children we could accept, and in fairness to taking a spot in the 
center, I paid to care for my own child. A direct result of lacking funds to support 
additional staff and qualified educators in the workforce.  Moving on, the shocking 
revelation that we had to move completely rocked our household, and our small island
community. Even with giving a two month notice,  it took the center an additional 
five months to find someone qualified and trained in Early Education. Again, pulling 
statistics from Maine Kids Count Data Book “Research shows the long-term benefits 
of quality  early learning experiences.      Programs that begin at birth lead to better 
outcomes for children and yield up to a 13 percent annual return on public 
investment.” We are at a pivotal point today. Everyone has a choice. If it’s the 
economy you care about, invest in child care. If it’s the children you care about, 
invest in child care.
Please vote in support of LD1726 and liberate educators, parents, and the working 
class .
Thank you. 

