Emilie Swenson
Portland
LD 1726
Dear Health and Human Services Committee Members, 
My name is Emilie Swenson and I live in Portland.  I am parent of an almost four year
old and board member of my child's daycare - Youth and Family Outreach, also in 
Portland.
I am writing to share my experiences with you. Finding child care was a stressful and 
challenging experience and I was fortunate enough to know that wait lists would be 
long so I started signing up for daycare lists just weeks after I found out I was 
pregnant. My husband and I both work full time and therefore we knew that child care
was something we would absolutely need in order to maintain our jobs. Child care 
access is critical to Maine's workforce and our economy. We need to expand 
opportunities for high quality child care for all families and make it more affordable 
for more families - expanding the subsidy eligibility will support this.
We also need high quality care and for teachers to be compensated for their incredible
skills and talents. Throughout my child's experience in daycare, he has been 
surrounded by caring, experienced, and educated professionals who create 
experiences that align with his development and support him to grow and learn in new
and exciting ways. Unfortunately, we also know that he has lost fantastic and 
qualified teachers over the past years due to low wages in the field. This is a loss for 
those for whom early childhood education is a passion and a field for which they are 
an excellent fit for and for our children who miss out on learning from such wonderful
people. It is incredibly important to me that we treat early childhood educators as the 
professionals they are and find solutions to increase their pay. 
It is my hope that LD1726, which supports efforts to invest in Maine’s system of 
child care by advancing compensation for educators (‘the workforce behind the 
workforce’), creating affordability for families, increasing access, and maintaining 
health and safety standards for children, will pass and support our state to improve the
quality of life for all Maine families. 
