 
 
 
Contact: Erin Gray, Senior Program Director, Boothbay Region YMCA 
P: 207.633.2855 E: egray@brymca.org 
Testimony of Erin Gray before  
the Committee on Health and Human Services in support of 
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care  
for Working Families 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Erin Gray and I am the Senior Program Director at the Boothbay Region YMCA. I 
support LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve thousands of 
children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, and summer camp. 
These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, and are a critical component of 
our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our economy.  
 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for my YMCA.  
 
1) Improvements to the childcare subsidy program: The shift from attendance-based to 
enrollment-based reimbursement for childcare subsidy is an important step in making this critical 
program work for families and providers. Enrollment-based reimbursement is a more stable and 
sustainable funding mechanism for providers, meaning we will be better equipped to meet the 
needs of our communities. We also support policies that allow more families in need to access this 
support.  
 
The subsidy program helps the families that we serve to unload the financial burden that is put upon 
them; specifically, for single guardian families. We know that our families rely on childcare to make 
sure they can work 40 hours per week to support their families. With illness and other outside factors 
(play dates, extracurricular activities, sleepovers with grandparents, etc.), being reimbursed by 
attendance isn’t as helpful. With enrollment-based reimbursement, our Y will be able to ensure that 
each family that relies on subsidy still has a place for their child(ren) and we will be better equipped to 
meet the needs of childcare on the peninsula.  
 
2) Doubling the monthly wage supplement for all childcare workers is a critical investment in 
our most important asset – the skilled early educators that teach our state’s children and allow us 
to offer consistent care for working families.  
 
Recruiting and retaining qualified staff has been an incredible challenge for us, and impacts the 
number of children we can serve. The wage supplement has been beneficial to our staff. Serving the 
community part-time is a difficult position to fill, and I believe that this supplement has helped retain 
staff. Increasing this funding would make a world of difference to them; they are individuals who work 
with children because they care and enjoy the type of work, but often cannot afford to do it part time. 
With this supplement, we’ve been able to retain more staff, which has been beneficial to the program. 
Consistency is key when it comes to working with children, and the more consistent we are with 
staffing, the stronger our programs are. Having strong early childhood education and 
before/afterschool programs in our community is critical. Families need a reliable place for their 
children to be safe, learn, grow, and become positive members of society and we could not do that 
without our dedicated, professional staff.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Erin Gray, Senior Program Director, Boothbay Region YMCA 
