 
 
 
Contact: Faith Boynton, Waldo County YMCA 
P: 207 338-4598 E: fboynton@waldocountyymca.org 
Testimony of Faith Boynton before  
the Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of 
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care  
for Working Families 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Faith Boynton, Youth Development Director at the Waldo County YMCA. I support LD 
1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve thousands of 
children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, and summer camp. 
These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, and are a critical component of 
our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our economy.  
 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for my YMCA.  
 
1) Improvements to the childcare subsidy program: The shift from attendance-based to 
enrollment-based reimbursement for childcare subsidy is an important step in making this critical 
program work for families and providers. Enrollment-based reimbursement is a more stable and 
sustainable funding mechanism for providers, meaning we will be better equipped to meet the 
needs of our communities. We also support policies that allow more families in need to access this 
support. 
 
The administration of enrollment-based reimbursement is significantly easier for us, meaning we can put 
more of our limited resources into helping families rather than doing paperwork. With enrollment-based 
budgeting, we know what to expect, which allows us to better plan and provide more assistance to the 
families we serve.  
 
2) Doubling the monthly wage supplement for all childcare workers is a critical investment in 
our most important asset – the skilled early educators that teach our state’s children and allow us 
to offer consistent care for working families. Recruiting and retaining qualified staff has been an 
incredible challenge for us, and impacts the number of children we can serve. 
 
The monthly childcare educator salary supplements have helped us to attract and educate a higher quality 
workforce. However, despite constant recruiting, we are currently down by three early childhood 
educators, which directly impacts the number of children we can care for. We are in desperate need of 
more comprehensive investment in our early childhood educator workforce so we can meet the demand 
for care in our community.   
 
Early education set me up for success. I want to be able to give that to all kids, regardless of their 
background. At the Waldo County Y, we provide nurturing and enriching care that some kids are 
unfortunately missing in their home lives. The work we do with these kids sets them on a path for 
success. We help children gain confidence in themselves and build strong relationships with peers. I think 
that foundation is critical for our children.   
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Faith Boynton 
Youth Development Director, Waldo County YMCA 
