Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
    
 
Testimony 
                                          In Support of  
LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
May 10, 2023 
  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee,  
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certified teacher. The MEA represents 
nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well as in our 
institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine Community 
College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired educators. 
 
I am writing this testimony on behalf of MEA in support of LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine’s 
Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families. 
 
Several years ago, the MEA Board of Directors voted to join the Right From the Start Coalition 
(https://www.rightfromthestartmaine.org/ ) as it was clear that there were great differences in what the 
children entering our schools had experienced in early childhood and this meant great disparities in 
students’ readiness to learn and further progress in their continued learning.  
 
When my own children were young, there was no greater stress in my life than finding quality childcare 
for them. I was incredibly fortunate to not only locate wonderful providers who had space for my 
children, but also to be able to afford to pay what they charged—and what they charged was nowhere 
near what they were worth. My children’s caregivers were excellent—I could never have afforded to pay 
them what they really deserved, both for the great care they gave my children, the safe spaces they 
provided, and the support they gave me as well. And I certainly would not have been able to continue 
teaching without these angels as a part of our lives. 
 
A generation later, and one of my daughters is now a parent herself. And she struggled as she 
endeavored to find the childcare she needed as she went back to work after her parental leave. 
Ultimately, it was her father, who was retired, who stepped in to fill the void as best as possible—of 
course he was caring and attentive and reliable, but it was not an ideal situation, neither for him nor for 
my daughter’s family. 
 
Then the pandemic hit. And there was even less availability or accessibility of providers, and given 
concerns for an elderly parent’s health, the aforementioned arrangement came to an end.  
 
At MEA, we heard about the many struggles our members had then, and that many continue to have, to 
locate, and to afford, childcare as they returned from remote instruction to be back in schools in person. 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
 
 
 
We lost a number of educators from the profession because they could not find care for their own 
children. 
And this of course is true for many families other than families of educators. 
 
As a nation, we should be ashamed of the little value we seem to place on quality childcare for all 
children, and especially on the little value we seem to give to those who care for them. Even though 
childcare providers are woefully underpaid, their services are still unaffordable for many working 
families, yet who could work without the reassurance that your children are well cared for? 
 
LD 1726 has many components to provide a multi-prong solution to this urgent situation. It does have a 
very high fiscal note. But as the ads for a major credit card say, what is the cost of quality childcare for 
all families who need it? Priceless.  
 
MEA has many priorities that we hope to see progress on in this session—raising the minimum wages 
for our educational support staff, increasing the minimum teacher salary, improving the pension for our 
retired educators. All of these priorities also have significant costs and are urgently needed to address the 
critical shortages of educators that our students need to learn and be supported. 
 
Still, MEA encourages your support of LD 1726 and urges that we all work to keep moving forward to 
provide what all children and working families need and deserve. 
 
 
1https://www.nosmallmatter.com/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
