 
 
 
Contact: Jacqueline Stahl, Bath Area Family YMCA 
P: 207.443.4112 E: jacqueline@bathymca.org 
 
Testimony of Jacqueline Stahl before  
the Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of 
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care  
for Working Families 
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services, my name is Jacqueline Stahl and I work for the Bath Area Family YMCA. I 
am also a parent of young children. I support LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by 
Supporting Child Care for Working Families. 
 
As a parent, it is my absolute pleasure to support LD 1726. This bill is a clear sign of the support 
and investment our legislative leaders intend for our youngest generation, not just for us 
parents, but for our entire Maine community. 
 
As we all have heard and know from experience, it takes a village to raise children. When my 
daughter Rose was born in July 2020, our villages had gone remote… As businesses, including 
childcare centers, struggled, and closed, parents were let go and faced financial insecurity and 
instability. I was lucky enough to work for the Y and was granted flexibility to remain working 
from home off and on while caring for my young children. But many were not. Without childcare, 
parents were unable to return to the workforce as we all began rebuilding, further contributing 
to the staffing shortages plaguing all sectors and hindering our state’s economic recovery.  
 
Rose remained on several extensive waitlists for more than two years before we were able to 
find quality childcare, without many ways to give her socialization outside of our home in the 
meantime. For us parents, this bill represents a sense of relief and assurance, knowing that our 
children and their education are being prioritized. Comprehensive investment in our childcare 
sector will ultimately bring peace of mind to all working parents so we can focus on our work and 
other responsibilities without worrying about the wellbeing of our little ones. 
 
This bill is a true testament to your commitment to investing in our children's futures. It's a bold 
statement that Maine values the growth and development of our youngest members, and that 
we will do everything in our power to ensure that they have the best possible start in life. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Jacqueline Stahl 
Bath Area Family YMCA 
 
