Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1726 
 
“An Act to Build Maine ’s Economy by Supporting 
Child Care for Working Families ” 
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Krysta West , Deputy Director  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services Committee , my name is Krysta West , I am a resident 
of Readfield and I am testifyin g today on behalf of the Maine forest Products 
Council in support of LD 1726, “An Act to Build Maine ’s Economy by 
Supporting Child Care for W orking Families ."  
 I apologize that I am unable to deliver this testimony in person today, as I am 
very quickly nearing my due date. As a mother with another little one on the way, I am all too familiar with the barriers to obtaining safe, affordable child care. As a matter of fact,  when I discovered that we would be welcoming a new child into 
our family, I informed my child care provider before I had a chance to even speak 
with my husband because I knew that in order to obtain a slot in Augusta, I would need at least 9 months of notice to ensure a seamless transition back into the workforce.  
 Members of the forest products industry, who the C ouncil represents, have also  
felt the impact s of child care shortages , and have identified it as a leading barrier 
to retaining workforce, especially in some of the more rural areas where they  
operate.  Without safe, local options, parents are faced with the tough choice of 
securing employment and picking up shifts or caring for children, w hich is why 
the Council has taken a strong interest in measures to increase access to  
affordable child care this session. T o my knowledge, this is the first session the 
Council has made this issue a priority, but it has risen to c risis level in the wake 
of the  pandem ic. 
 These challenges are not unique to our industry or state. According to a recent report by 
Ready  Nation , the child care shortage is costing the United States $122 billion in lost 
earnings, productivity and revenue each year. The report also found that 85% of parents indicated that problems with child care h urt their work effort or their time availability for 
work. Twenty percent of those surveyed reported they had to exit the labor market due to child  care challenges and more than 1/3 reported that inadequate child care capacity 
restricts their career option s, causing them to turn down important opportunities such as    
job offers, education or work- related training.  
2 
  
Some larger employers within the  forest industry are taking a proactive approach and are working to open new 
facilities in underserved communities or secure spaces with  existing daycare providers. To support this trend, we 
are working on a meaningful tax credit to enable employers of all sizes to support wo rking families and help 
create additional slots (LD 1222).  
 There is some concern, however, that even if we are able to build facilities , secure more slots  in underserved 
commu nities  and offset  part of  the cost for our workforce , we will  still struggle to obtain enough child care 
providers to fully realize the return on our investments. Ch ild care as a profession ranks in the bottom 2% of 
earners, despite training, credentials and degrees that are required for this field. An esti mated 1,100 child care 
educators are needed just to meet the current licensed capacity. For this reason, we have joined a coalition to  
support this bill (LD 1726) as well . As drafted, this bill  accomplishes  a number of important goals, but 
importantly to us, it  will double the monthly wage supplement for child ca re educators . This is necessary to 
make these positions more competitive with K -12 education without further burdening parents with c hild care 
costs that can be prohibitive.   As an industry, we are ver y interested in working proactively with your support to find solutions to address the 
child care crisis because it  is having a real i mpact on workforce availability and participation. In order for our 
industry and all sectors of Maine’s economy to thrive, we must collectively tackle the se issues head -on. For 
these reasons, please support LD 1726 (and  hopefully, LD 1222 if it advances to the floor).  
 Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
