 
 
 
 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the HHS Committee:  
My name is Mary Alice Scott, and I am the Public Affairs Manager at the Maine Association of Nonprofits. 
MANP is a growing membership organization made up of over 1,000 nonprofit members from all 16 
counties. Since 1994, MANP has grown to become Maine’s comprehensive resource for the tools, knowledge, and connections nonprofits need to be effective and well -run.
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for 
Working Families.  As you all know, nonprofits are vital to Maine’s economy and quality of life. You may not 
know that nonprofits employ 1 in 6 Maine workers and mobilize more than 400,000 volunteers each year. 
Most Maine nonprofits are very small and community -based. 88% have annual budgets less than $500,000. 
61% have annual budgets under $50,000.  
 
In a national survey on the nonprofit workforce shortage from late 20211, nonprofits identified lack of 
access to affordable, high -quality child care as the second biggest factor for nonprofits being unable to fully 
fill staff vacancies.  
 
Maine -specific results from the survey indicated that more than 16% of respondents stated that the 
inability to find chi ld care affected recruitment and retention.2 Nearly 80% of respondents cited salary 
competition as a factor preventing them from filling job openings. Many child care centers are nonprofits. 
The increased stipend and potential cost of care model would help ameliorate the issue of salary 
competition for those organizations.  
 
When it comes to the workforce shortage in our mission driven organizations, especially those in the human services sector, these staffing shortages can have serious consequences. In our  field, being short -
staffed can be deadly.
 
 
In the survey, a healthcare and mental health provider wrote of empty beds in their group home due to 
staffing vacancies and a growing list of for special -needs children waiting months for services, all while 
anticipating more vacancies in a workforce “stressed after working so many additional hours trying to fill 
these gaps.”  
 
The impact of the shortages can be seen in virtually every local community as nonprofits are forced to 
restrict needed services, institu te waiting lists, or close operations entirely. Because individuals and 
communities rely so heavily on charitable nonprofits for their wellbeing, the nonprofit workforce shortage 
impacts everyone.  
 
We urge passage of LD 1726 to improve the child care cris is, help reduce the workforce shortage, and allow 
nonprofits to continue serving our communities.  
Thank you for your time and consideration . 
                                                                    
1  https://www.councilofnonprofits.org/reports/nonprofit -workforce -shortages -crisis -affects -everyon e 
2  https://www.nonprofitmaine.org/blog/the -nonprofit -workforce -shortage -in-maine -part -1 
 
