 
 
 
Contact: Meg Helming, YMCA Alliance of Northern New England  
P: 207.232.9896 E: meg.helming@nneymcas.org  
 
Testimony of Meg Helming before  
the Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of 
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care  
for Working Families 
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services, my name is Meg Helming and I’m the COO of the YMCA Alliance of 
Northern New England, which represents the 15 YMCAs in Maine. I am also a parent of two 
young children. I support LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care 
for Working Families. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy.  
 
Many of my YMCA colleagues have submitted testimony in support of this bill from a childcare 
provider lens. Today, I stand before you as a parent of two young children, struggling to 
navigate a care system that simply cannot meet my family’s needs. Due to systemic challenges 
in the early childhood education sector, I feel like I am counting down the days until my children 
turn five so they can go to public school and my husband and I can get out from under the 
financial and logistical burden of maintaining childcare. My husband and I pay $566 per week for 
childcare – that is nearly $29,000 per year. My experience is not an anomaly. The average cost 
for childcare in Maine is $10,000 - $15,000 per child per year. To say that this puts an incredible 
strain on families is an understatement. To be clear: I love my children’s childcare provider; my 
kids are thriving there. But securing and maintaining the care has been incredibly stressful, and 
the cost is crushing. This isn’t fair or sustainable for my family, or any of the families that are 
struggling at no fault of their own. 
 
The childcare system desperately needs significant and sustained public investment to meet the 
needs of Maine families like mine. I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1726. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Meg Helming 
YMCA Alliance of Northern New England 
 
 
