                                                                                                                                      
 
 
Testimony In Support of  LD 1 726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care 
for Working Families  
 
May 10 , 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Service s. my name is Ninette Irabaruta , and I am the Director of Public Policy and 
Advocacy  at United Way of Southern Maine (UWSM).  I am here today on behalf of all the United Ways 
in Maine to exp ress our support for LD 1726, a bill that would improve the existing child care subsidy 
program and aims to provide funding to increase eligibility and wages for child care services.   
  
The Covid -19 pandemic made it incredibly clear that our early childhood education (ECE) providers are 
essential to establishing a strong foundation for learning in our children, but also that they are the 
backbone of the American workforce.  In these unprecedented times of turbulence brought about by the 
global pande mic, child care providers must manage the increasingly complex social, emotional, and 
behavioral needs of our youngest learners. Doubling the monthly wage supplement for these early 
childcare educators is essential.  If our aim is to attract and retain hig h-quality teachers to lead our 
students through the most pivotal years of their development, this is a step we must take to further 
professionalize the ECE career path.    
  
Another aspect of LD 1726 that we believe to be pivotal is the expansion of the ex isting child care 
subsidy program.  Access to reliable childcare is often one of the key barriers that keeps caregivers out 
of the workforce, and families struggling in poverty.  Expanding the subsidy eligibility to 125% state 
median income will provide gr eater access to high -quality child care opportunities like Head Start —
which has consistently proven to promote increased school readiness when it comes to language 
acquisition, and social and emotional growth among our learners from low -income households.  It is our 
view that when both of these elements are considered together —increased wages and greater subsidy 
eligibility —it will make significant improvements to our ECE system.   
 
All the United Ways in Maine support LD 1726 because we believe deeply that investing in our child  
care professionals and bolstering access to high -quality learning opportunities will move the needle 
when it comes to giving our deserving children a strong start.  For these reasons, we respectfully 
encourage you to support and pass  LD 1726.   
  
Thank you for your leadership and service.   
 
