Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 10, 2023  
 
Senator Jo seph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1726 , An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Chil d Care for Working Families  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services : 
 
Thank you for  the opportunity  to provide our perspective on  LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine’s 
Economy by Supporti ng Child Care for Working Families  as drafted . 
LD 1726  is a wide -ranging bill that proposes a number of changes to the Child Care Subsidy Program 
(CCSP) and the oversight of child care providers.  It would : 
• Increase the funding fo r the child care worker sti pend by $15 million (doubling the existing 
amount);  
• Require t hat the Department determine CCSP eligibility within 15 days and provide retroactive 
reimbursement to an applicant during the application period ;   
• Require t hat the Dep artment provide  notificatio n to a provider w ithin two days of a recipient’s 
eligibility changing ; 
• Require t hat the Department pay providers under CCSP within 15 days of serv ices being 
provided ; 
• Direct t he establishment of a quality child care “estimator to ol” to calculate the actual  cost of 
quality child care ; 
• Direct t he development of a plan to limit the cost of child care by 2030 to no more than 7  percent  
of a family’s inco me for a family earning up to 250  percent  of the median family income. This 
plan must include cost modeling an d an eliminate of the “cliff effect” in child care funding ; 
• Direct t he Department to develop an early childhood integrated data  system ; 
• Establish a Child Care Task Force to make recommendations regarding child care , composed of 
provider, advocates, parents , and others but excluding the Department which would staff this 
task force ; 
• Change CCSP to streamlin e and simplify  the program  and incorporat e a new “Scholarship 
Program ;” 
• Update to CCSP rules to pay up to 125  percent of the S tate Median Income ( SMI) and make 
permanent the payment of providers based on enrollment, not attendance ; and  
• Establish CCSP for employees of child care pro viders regardless o f their income.  
The Maine Department of Health and Human Services and OCFS  share the goals of this legislation : to 
increase the affordability of and access to child care in Maine. Under the leadership of Governor Mills, 
 
 Maine has made strides toward these goals, as well as improving quality. For example, Maine has 
invested in new construction and capacity expansio n, worker payment supplements, advancing  
innovati ons in early childhood education, and quality improvements . 
OCFS is opposed to this bill because we estimate  that it s propose d funding would be inadequate for its 
purpose, creating  expe ctations for families that it cannot meet . It would also complicate  and duplicate  
program administration . These concerns are detailed further be low. However, the Department stands 
ready to work with the bill’s sponso rs on changes that the Department could support in this bill to 
advance quality, a ffordable, and accessible child care in Maine.  
The first concern is related to inadequate funding for an expansive policy change.  The bill’s provision to 
increase eligibility for CCSP to 125  percent of the SMI  is significantly underfun ded and thus create s a 
false promise  to families . Under federal law and regulation, the Child Care Development Block Grant 
(CCDBG), which provides the primary funding for CCSP , cannot be used for families over 85  percent  of 
the SMI . As such , to increase eligibility to 125  percent of the SMI  would necessitate full funding by 
Maine’s General Funds. However, t he bill only includes $3.7 million annually for this cost , whereas 
OCFS estimates that the annual cost of this change would be approximately $15 million , leaving three -
fourth s of eligible f amilies , approximately 850 children,  without the promised support.  
 
Second, the legislation would create implementation timelines that could not be achieved within existing 
systems and resources  or without duplication o f effort . For example , the proposed requirement regarding 
eligibility and reimbursement timelines a s well as  retroactive reimbursement would represent significant 
departures from current policy and practice . Without sufficient time  for testing , implementat ion, and 
program inte grity assurances, Maine could be at risk for p aying a provider who is not eligible , thus  
creat ing a federal compliance issue. This bill would  require significant rulemaking (changing the 
program name, eligibili ty guidelines, etc.).  
Relatedly, it would be d uplicative and potentially complicate ongoing work. The Children’s Cabinet 
Early Childhood Advisory Council (CCECAC)  was legislatively established in 2019 to advise the 
Children’s Cabinet. The CCECAC serves as the State Advisory Counci l on Early Childhood Education 
and is responsible for ensuring statewide coordination and collaboration among the wide range of early 
childhood programs  and stakeholders in the State, including child care, Head Start, IDEA preschool and 
infants and familie s’ programs , and pre -kindergarten programs. Other current efforts include the $24 
million  federally funded Preschool Development Grant (PDG)  that will accomplish some of the goals of 
this bill.   
Additionally, OCFS in conjunction with stakeholders and other partners is already developing an 
integrated data system, although the goal and impact of that system may be different than wha t is 
envisioned in this bill. The purpose of the system un der development is to integrate data across systems 
from programs serving young children and their families in order to support policy makers to make 
informed policy decisions  and improve outcomes  for children . The Early Childhood Integrated Data 
System ( ECIDS) will match data that state agencies already collect.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Todd  Landry, Ed.D. 
Director , Office of Child and Family Services  

