Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Patty Kidder 
and I live in Springvale, located in the City of Sanford. I am here today to testify 
in favor or LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Childcare 
for Working Families.
Maine is facing a serious child care crisis. We had a daycare shortage before 
the Pandemic started and many more closed during and immediately 
afterwards. The licensed child care centers and preschools that remain open are
struggling to find and retain qualified early childhood educators due to low pay 
(and probably no affordable housing but that’s a different bill).
My daughter, following the advice of a close friend, put my grandson on several 
daycare waiting lists shortly after conception. He is two and a half years old and 
his name hasn’t come up yet over 3 years later. Fortunately, her mother-in-law 
and I were able to take care of him so she could go back to work last year. She 
finally found child care she could afford through a coworker at a completely 
different daycare but it is only part time. There just isn’t enough affordable child 
care available in our area for the number of growing families.
LD 1726 will help by it’s multi-faceted approach. Helping to make more Maine 
families eligible for significant help paying for childcare and free Head Start 
programs is just one piece of the solution. This bill would help providers pay 
their qualified workers a living wage which will help them hire and retain more 
early childhood educators. This bill will help increase the number of licensed 
childcare slots available and decrease the out of pocket expense many families 
will need to pay to access them.
I have heard many people say no one wants to work today and that why there’s 
a worker shortage but I know that’s not true for most people. A couple of other 
reasons are that the homeless can’t work until they have stable housing. No 
clean clothes, no shower, etc. and that is a different bill with a different 
committee but the other reason is No Childcare. Single parents and couples 
can’t both work without quality licensed daycare for their children and LD 1726 
will help fix the childcare shortage. I urge you to please vote in favor of LD 1726:
An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Childcare for Working Families.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Patty Kidder
4 Carpenter Street
Springvale, ME 04083-1109
(207) 977-3325 (cell)
