TESTIMONY BY PAULA BENOIT 
FORMER STATE SENATOR FROM SAGADAHOC 
 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEES 
ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1726  
“AN ACT TO BUILD MAINE’S ECONOMY BY SUPPORTING CHILD CARE FOR WORKING 
FAMILIES”  
MAY 10, 2023, 10:00AM 
 
 
 
 
Good morning, Chairs Baldacci and Myer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. M y name is Paula Benoit and I live in Phippsburg. I spent many years as an 
owner and operator of several small businesses in Bath and I am also a former Senator from 
Sagadahoc County. Today, I wish to offer my wholehearted support for LD 1726 An Act to 
Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working Families sponsored by President 
Troy Jackson. 
 
I learned about the need for this bill  in a most unusual way. I was having breakfast with two 
friends at a favorite spot in Topsham and the hostess who seated us had a 3-month-old baby 
strapped to her front as she helped people to their seats and cashed people out. While the baby 
was content to be with her mother and made everyone smile as they entered the restaurant, we 
learned she brought the baby to work because she could not afford the $250/week in child care, 
so she had no other option if she wanted to work. Luckily, her boss allowed her to have the baby 
with her and I guarantee all the patrons loved looking at the adorable little girl while her mother 
went about her job, but I was sorry that this was not a choice but a necessity. The mother wants 
to work and help provide for her family, but economic circumstances make this almost 
impossible for her to do.  
 
My friend having breakfast with me understood this all too well. Her daughter works at a child 
care center in Bath and even though she has a degree in early education, she earns very little 
doing a job she loves and a job that is so desperately needed. Our child care system is in crisis. 
 
My third breakfast companion happened to be working for a group that is promoting passage of 
this legislation, so we spent breakfast learning about the problems and more importantly the 
solutions to our child care crisis. I have always been a doer. When there is a problem, I want to 
try and fix it. Fortunately, you have a bill that will help that working mom and her baby by 
making child care more affordable and increasing pay for the child care educators who work 8 to 
10 hours a day for less money than they would earn working in a fast-food restaurant. In return 
this will help employers, large and small, find enough people to work and keep their businesses 
running. It is win-win legislation with parents and employers reaping the benefits. I hope you 
will pass and fund LD 1726. Thank you for your consideration. 
 
