 
 
 
May 9, 202 3 
 
Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services  
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
C/O Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Letter of S upport for LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine ’s Economy by Supporting Child Care 
for Working Families  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci  and Representative Meyer  and d istinguished committee members:  
 
I am not only the City Manager for the City of Caribou, but it has also  been my home for over 
31 years . I consider it a true blessing to have watched the children of our community grow 
up, further their education, s tart careers, get married and commence  living fulfilling and 
happy li ves here in central Aroostook County. I watch  with joy as these young coupl es 
became  parents .  I am delighted when I am introduced to the ne xt generation of citizens ! 
 For many, p arenthood can be stressful with the new demands on the family budget, time 
pressures and trying to prove your head is still in work mode when on the job. This seems to 
cause  further anxiety  and marital strain at a time  that should be the blissful years of their 20s 
and 30s . What I have observe d is that  newlyweds often chang e career fields , delay starting a 
family, or leav e the full-time work force because adequate  childcare is n ot accessible . By 
supporting our childcare professionals, we help build families and our workforce.  
 
Caribou currently has mo re high-quality  options than many neighboring  towns  with a mix of 
in-home providers and centers . I met  many  at a September 15, 20 22, forum in Caribou . 
These educators  spoke of the  challenge  to simply stay open and thrive  in the profession  they 
love while navigating a system wh ich seemingly makes it impossible  to operate a viable 
business caring for the youngest members of our community . They care for  the kids and 
know their work is essential, is it right t o take advantage o f their passion for this work?  
 
Caribou is a community that takes pride in our schools, our hospital, our government  services , 
and most of all – our network of hard-working small business es that include family farms, 
service trades , outdoor recreation econom y, and th e best hospitality industry in the County . 
One common denominator  – they need workers , and workers need  daycare . Please h elp keep 
the doors open in our community  and other s by assisting our childcare pro fessionals . 
 Thank you, Senator Jackson,  and co -sponsor Representative Terry , and committee members 
for recognizing that this is an important issue facing the State of Main e. Please reach out 
anytime with questions: (207) 493 – 5961 (my direct line) or pthompson@cariboumaine.org . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Penny Thompson, City Manager  CITY OF CARIBOU, MAINE               Phone:   (207) 493 -5961 
                 Fax:   (207) 498-3954 
 
   Office of the City Manag er Municipal Building  
25 High Street  
Caribou, M e 04736  
