District 123: Cape Elizabeth   
May 10, 2023  
 
Testimony of Rep. Rebecca Millett supporting  
LD 1726 , An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care 
for Working Families  
Before the Joint Standing  Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
Good morning , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and honorable  members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services . My name is Rebecca Millett, and I represent House District 
123, which makes up most of Cape Elizabeth. Thank you for the opportunity to come before you as a 
cosponsor in support of  LD 1726 , An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for 
Working Families . I am grateful to Senate President Jackson  for bringing this bill forward.  
Quality, affordable and accessible child care is critical to supporting early development, which we know 
is the foundation to ensuring that kids will thrive  both now and later in life. Research shows that these 
early years are a period of incredible growth , and when we fail to provide children with the support and 
services they need, we miss a significant opportunity.  
Access to child care  is also an economic imperative. Parents cannot  participate fully in our workforce 
when they do not have child care, and many  parents  – mostly women – are forced to leave the workforce 
entirely to care for young  children. The Maine Development Foundation’s Measures of Growth report 
calls our state’s labor force participation rate an economic “red flag” and highlights increas ing access to 
child care as a way to improve it.1 At a time when businesses across the state are struggling to fill 
positions – and, frankly, families across the state are struggling to make ends meet, from an economic 
perspective, this is a problem we can not afford to ignore.  
LD 1726 seeks to tackle the issue head on. It provides much -needed funding to support families and 
child care providers alike. It also improves stakeholder input and begins the process of creating a 
roadmap to a future where all Maine  families can access the highest quality child care at an affordable 
cost.  
Thank you for  your consideration.  
                                                           
1 Maine Development Foundation 2022 Measures of Growth: www.mdf.org/measures -of-growth/labor -force -participation/    
Rebecca Millett  
50 Market St., Ste 1A PMB 162  
 South Portland, ME 04106  
Residence: (207) 415 -3770  
Rebecca.Millett@legislature.maine.gov   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 

