Rosalyn Fisher
Bangor
LD 1726
                               Testimony of Rosalyn Fisher
                                       In Support of
        LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine's Economy 
                  by Supporting Child Care and Working Families
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distringuished members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee, my name is Rosalyn Fisher. I am a retired 
occupational therapist and member of the Childcare/Jobs Team, Faith Linking in 
Action.  I am testifyilng in support of LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine's Economy by
Suppporting Child Care and Working Families
In over 40 years in occupational therapy practice I worked with children from 
inrfancy through high school, and taught child development to occupational therapy 
students and to child care providers.
 As a member of the Childcare/Jobs Team, I have listened to parents who had so 
much trouble applying for the Child Care Subsidy that they gave up, and to other 
parents who simply could not find affordable, high quality child care so they reduced 
their hours, quit their jobs or begged retired parents to come back from Florida to care
for their children. I have heard from child care providers who have long wait lists and 
have had to close rooms due to staff shortages.  They appreciated the Federal and 
State support, but the $1.00 an hour increase in the wage supplement has not been 
enough to attract new providers to work long hours for low compensation, or retain 
those who have had to leave the fired they loved in order to get a job that provides 
living wages and benefits.
Child Care has been in a crisis for many years, but the Pandemic brought the 
probllems into the headlines as child cares closed and parents could not work. The 
Child Care Workforce is the workforce behind the workforce. A highly qualified 
workforce ensures that chiildren are in a place where they can learn and grow, and 
parents can concentrate on their jobs. I support LD 1726 because Maine needs a long 
term plan to increase investments in Child Care Programs while also increasing 
subsidy eliegibility. Parents need increased access to high dquality affordable child 
care and providers need the increase in the wage supplement from $200 to $400 a 
month.
I also urge the Committee to address the additional crisis for parents of children who 
have disorders or delays and struggle to find high quality child care so their child can 
develop to his fullest potential.  I knew a family child care provider who arranged the 
lunch schedule for the older children, so she and I could meet with the infant's mother
on her lunch hour.  In a child care center, a provider got a baby pool, filled it with 
balls and took the toddler out of his wheelchair to sit in the pool and play with other 
children.  A parent arranged sign language classes for teachers in a pre school, so her 
son could use his signs at school and the teachers could teach signs to all the children 
in songs and stories.  Early learning for infants and toddlers who have disabilities or 
delays depends on a partnership of parents, child care providers andd specialists, such 
as therapists to provide education and guidance.
I urge the committee to address this crisis as you support LD 1726.
Thank you for your consideration.
