 
  
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Maine at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
DATE:   May 1 0, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Health and Human Services   
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations  
  samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   Support for LD 1726, An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child 
  Care for Working Families  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services : On behalf of the  University of Maine System (UMS), I 
am writing in support of investments in Maine’s early childhood educator workforce, as proposed 
by LD 1726.   
Our S ystem is proud to be t he state’s largest producer of classroom -ready teachers, 
having awarded nearly 4,000 education degrees or certificates just in the past five years . 
Collectively , our six educator preparation programs have graduated  24 of the past 30 Maine 
Teachers of the Year.  
It is with this tradition of excellence and experience in preparing thousands of talented Maine 
teachers and informed by the findings of our own independent Mai ne Education Policy Research 
Institute that UMS supports State investment  to increase teacher pay, including for Maine’s 
early childhood educators .  
As we better understand the benefits of high -quality early learning on a child’s development, we 
are also i ncreasingly understanding the importance of preparing their teachers, through both 
classroom theory and hands -on practice in early learning settings. Research reinforces the positive 
correlation between the rigorous preparation and degree attainment of ear ly childhood educators 
and the outcomes of their students, especially those who are at -risk. 
Yet low wages mean too few are entering this important field and those who do are not pursuing 
the postsecondary education they need to best support their students ’ success and advance their 
own earnings and opportunity . For example, w hile enrollment in UMS education -related 
undergraduate degree and certificate programs has increased slightly  over the last five years  
despite overall System enrollment declines , participation in those programs specific to early 
childhood education is down nearly 30 %. The result: too many Maine kids are not receiving the 
high-quality early childhood regular and special education services they need to realize their full 
potential, and their pare nts are not able to fully participa te in the workforce due to lack of  access to 
affordable, reliable childcare.   
Furthermore, more than one -third of the students at Maine’s public universities are now over the 
age of 24. As our System increasingly serves a dults looking to advance their social and 
economic mobility through the proven power of postsecondary education, the inability to 
find and afford reliable childcare tops the list of barriers to enrolling, staying in school and 
completing a door -opening deg ree.  
Maine’s public universities are on the front lines of this workforce crisis not just as the stat e’s 
leader in education and educato r preparation, but also as one of its largest employers . 
 
 
 In a pre -pandemic survey of University of Maine  faculty with dependents, 32% of 
respondents indicated they have considered ending their employment with the universi ty 
because of the conflicts between childcare responsibilities and work . At the flagship’s  
childcare center,  which mostly serves university employees,  the current wait  list has 203 children . 
The center has two assistant teacher vacancies, one of which has been open for two years and 
has necessitated  us limit ing enrollment below what our license allows to meet staffing ratios. 
Meanwhile, at the University of Maine at Farmington ’s early care and ed ucation center, which 
predominantly serves the community, there are 57 children on the wait list. 
The directors of th ese two university centers report that the $200 monthly wage supplements their 
employees have been receiving has bolstered workforce  retent ion, especially given increasing 
costs of living  and more competitive compensation available  for Head Start and public PK -3 
positions , as well as  in retail and other sectors . They also noted that the stipend allowed some full -
time early childhood educators within their centers to not have  to work additional jobs.  
For these reasons, we urge you to further expand and make permanent these salary 
supplements .   
Your investment in this essential workforce will complement our own efforts within UMS. For 
example, t his summer, UMF will reopen its nationally accredited  Sweatt -Winter Child Care and 
Early Education Center  at a new, larger location. Beyond providing loca l families affordable  high-
quality childcare , Sweatt -Winter gives UMF students majoring in early childhood regular and 
special education  real-world learning and observation opportunities . Funded through a State bond , 
Maine Jobs & Recovery Plan monies and Cong ressionally Directed Spending  (earmarks)  secured 
by Sens. Susan Collins and Angus King, the expansion will enable the center to enroll more young 
children including, for the first time, infants and toddlers, and also allow UMF to expand enrollment 
in its early childhood education degree program that we hope will be in greater demand with the 
passage of LD 1726.  
We are also in proce ss of securing federal funding , also supported by Sens. Collins and King,  to 
expand UMaine ’s center , with a commitment to reserve a portion of new slots for depend ents of 
community members not directly conne cted to the campus . The success of both  of these 
expansion projects is dependent upon our ability to recruit and retain early childhood educators.  
Never has it been more apparent: if we are to strengthen and grow our economy, we must 
also strengthen and grow our early childhood education workforce . 
Thank you for the opportunity to write in  support of Maine’s youngest students and those who 
prepare them fo r success. Please let me know if I can provide additional information on behalf of 
Maine’s public universities in advance of your work session on this important legislation.  
 
