 
 
 
Contact: Sarah Farrell CLC YMCA  
P: 207-563-9622 E: sfarrell@clcymca.org 
 
Testimony of Sarah Farrell before  
the Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of 
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care  
for Working Families 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Sarah Farrell and I’m the Director of Operations at the Central Lincoln County YMCA 
in Damariscotta. I support LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care for 
Working Families. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve thousands of 
children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, and summer camp. 
These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, and are a critical component of 
our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our economy.  
 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for my YMCA.  
 
1) Improvements to the childcare subsidy program: The shift from attendance-based to 
enrollment-based reimbursement for childcare subsidy is an important step in making this critical 
program work for families and providers. Enrollment-based reimbursement is a more stable and 
sustainable funding mechanism for providers, meaning we will be better equipped to meet the 
needs of our communities. We also support policies that allow more families in need to access this 
support. 
 
Our Y can serve many families with subsidy. This gives children access to quality care and a best start in 
life. Our Y loses money when children on subsidy don’t attend, due to an illness, appointment, or vacation. 
We have to hold that slot for that child regardless of whether or not they attend, so there is no way for us 
to recoup those losses. This reimbursement is administratively and financially burdensome for providers 
and directly impacts our ability to serve low-moderate income families.  
 
 
2) Doubling the monthly wage supplement for all childcare workers is a critical investment in 
our most important asset – the skilled early educators that teach our state’s children and allow us 
to offer consistent care for working families. Recruiting and retaining qualified staff has been an 
incredible challenge for us, and impacts the number of children we can serve. 
 
The salary supplement has helped with staffing and retention, but we are in desperate need of more 
investment in our educators. Childcare is hard and skilled work, and we must compensate these 
professionals appropriately or we will never be able to meet the community demand for care. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Sarah Farrell – Central Lincoln County YMCA 
 
 
