 
MAINE 
 
 
 
4 Jersey Circle / Topsham, ME 04086 / 207.725.5946 
 
 
 
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Re: LD 1726 “AN ACT TO BUILD MAINE’S ECONOMY BY SUPPORTING CHILD CARE FOR WORKING 
FAMILIES”  
 
 
Dear Chairs Baldacci, Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human Services 
Committees, 
 
Please accept my written testimony in support of the child care wage supplements within LD 1726 
before you today.  
 
I offer my comments as a business leader, as a member of Educate Maine’s Board of Directors, and 
as a member of the business organization ReadyNation. Gorham Saving Bank and these 
organizations are working to support the MaineSpark Coalition’s work toward achieving Maine’s 
educational attainment goal that 60 percent of Maine adults have a credential of value by 2025.  
 
I believe that the lack of access to the quality early learning found in child care is an economic issue 
for Maine.  
Over the course of the last few years there has been an increasing number of news reports and 
editorials commenting on the fragility of the child care sector, how that was made worse by the 
pandemic, and the ongoing struggles within the child care workforce plagued by low wages, long 
hours, and high turnover.  And the fact that all of these issues are challenging every sector of 
Maine’s economy, especially in rural Maine, has been highlighted.  
For industries like mine and many others, many of my employees rely on child care so they can work 
with the peace of mind that their children are safe and nurtured.  The stark reality is that child care is 
the workforce that supports all other workforces in Maine.  
Without affordable and accessible child care, Maine’s economy suffers.   
From a business perspective, the lack of access to child care programs, especially that faced by 
rural children and their families, is a real economic challenge for Maine. 
As policymakers know well, Maine is the most rural state in our nation. Nearly a quarter – 23 
percent  – of kids in rural Maine live in poverty. They often lack access to resources, including early 
education programs and child care. In fact,  2021 and 2023 reports by Council for a Strong America 
indicate that 26 percent  of Maine’s rural children today live in “child care deserts,” where three times 
more kids are age- eligible for child care than there are licensed slots. 
Quality early learning and child care programs significantly help kids build a strong foundation for 
success throughout their school years  and as adults . They are a key part of the solution to 
increasing both the number of people in Maine’s workforce and their skill level, two of Maine’s 
biggest economic challenges. These programs can also serve to attract new families to our state, 
helping to grow Maine’s workforce. 
For all of these reasons, I am pleased to support the bipartisan LD 1726 proposal that seeks to 
increase wage supplements for child care workers by an additional $200 per month, and thus raise 
 
MAINE 
 
StrongNation.org/ReadyNation 
the average hourly wage to about $17.20, or $35,700 annually.  It is my hope that all of you will work 
in a bipartisan fashion to support this important proposal for a critically vital sector of Maine’s 
economy.  
It is an economic imperative that Maine prioritize investments that improve access to quality child 
care for our kids. It also is our responsibility to make sure every child – regardless of where they live 
– has access to the resources and supports that will help them succeed in life. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments and your work and dedication to building a strong 
economy for Maine. 
 
Sincerely, 
Steve deCastro 
Steve deCastro 
President and CEO, Gorham Savings Bank 
Gorham 
