   
Testimony of Sue Powers  
In support of  LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting  
Child Care and Working Families  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Sue Powers  and I am an early childhood education and Whole 
Family Approach consultant with Maine Community Action Partnership. In my role, I work in partnership with the Maine Head Start Directors Association and Community Action Networks in 
Maine to improve the quality and conditions that support increased outcomes for social and 
economic mobility of Maine families , leading to their future success.  I’m testifying in support of 
LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care and Working Families.   
 There are so many components of LD 1726 that promote building a system to support families, 
children, parents, and early childhood educators. In this testimony, I will choose a few I feel 
most impactful in b ringing strength, showing value and professionalizing a system that has been 
broken and struggling for decades.  
 Early Childhood Education is the foundation of our educational system and the very place where 
impressions are formed that will influence values for lifelong learning. Early Childhood 
Educators are just that, teachers and educator s every bit as valuable as a teacher or educator 
in our K -12 systems. Understanding the  impact these early educators have on the future 
success of our children, let us value them in compensation equal to their counterparts in the public K -12 system. Raising the compensation for our birth –  5 educators shows value for the 
important role they play in the development of our children’s future.  Using one Aroostook 
provider example, a certified bachelor level early childhood educator starts at $800/week and 
the same certified teacher in the public -school  system starts at $ 975, a difference of $9,000 
annually.  This provider is paying in the upper salary range for the county. For many providers 
this gap is more. How is this equitable and how can this disparity encourage young 
professionals to enter the early childhood education syst em?  
 Every day  early childhood educators leave the field for various reasons related to 
compensation, benefits and often because they cannot find affordable child care for their own 
children. Think of how hard it is to go to work every day  in a profession that pays you 
substandard wages and then to have to pay market rate child care for your own children. LD 1726 supports child care subsidy funding for child care employees. This subsidy provides an 
additional benefit to employees in the early education profession to access child care, removing 
it as a barrier to staying in the field. Over the last year, a child care provider in Aroostook had 
four teachers resign to go to work for another provider that offered them reduced child care fees 
as a benefit. This employee benefit made the difference for these educators to be able to make 
ends meet at the end of the month.   
 The current payment structure for child care subsidy and reimbursement is based on a market 
rate system that reflects what the county market c an bear, which is much less than the actual 
cost of providing the care. This system requires businesses to reduce ratio and enrollment, cut 
corners on quality and in total make business decisions based on economic factors rather than 
on what is best for children and families, all in an effort to keep the doors open. Instilling a Cost 
of Care model would look at the true cost of providing quality services to families and reimburse 
   
providers based on that cost. Effects of this model has potential to increase enrolment 
opportunities and increase quality services provided. This model as well as the practice of 
reimbursing providers based on enrollment rather than attendance, supports providers to be 
able to operate a business knowing what the weekly/monthly income will be. Expecting child 
care providers to not receive reimbursement when children are absent is another discrepancy 
that sets the early childhood system apart from public school. Our public -school  counterparts do 
not expect to go without revenue when c hildren are absent, so why would we have a system for 
early childhood providers that has such an expectation. It is important to keep the enrollment vs 
attendance reimbursement system in place.  
 
Access to quality child care is a service that we would hope to be available to more low to 
middle income families in Maine. Increasing the subsidy eligibility from 85% to 125% of median 
income would open up enrollment opportunities for more Maine families to access child care. 
This supports Maine’s long- term plan that by 2030, child care costs for families would be limited 
to no more than 7% of their income when family earn up to 250% of state median income.  This 
plan would put more money in the pockets of families to support essential needs related to 
increased c osts of food, fuel, transportation and housing.  
 Lastly, being able to expand the comprehensive services offered by Head Start to reach more 
children and families living in difficult and complex living situations would make a significant 
difference in supporting families to reach social and economic  mobility and children to reach 
school readiness. Currently federal Head Start income guidelines use the 1965 based Federal Poverty Level to determine eligibility. Eligibility remains at 100% of the FPL even as minimum 
wage has increased and the definition of living in poverty has changed. Many families are barely 
getting by with jobs well above the FPL and as such, are not eligible for Head Start. Increasing the funding for state Head Start eligibility to 185% of FPL would align with other program 
eligibility  like WIC and Maine Care. This increased eligibility would allow families making above 
100% poverty, but experiencing addiction, domestic violence, disabilities, housing instability to access Head Start for their children. This increase in income eligibility would open access to 
public school partnership and child care partnerships to enroll children and families needing 
comprehensive services and support to make sure their children are ready for K. It would also 
better secure continued Head Start enroll ment for children moving from Early Head Start to 
Head Start continued services if their families now make more than they did three years ago at initial eligibility for  EHS enrollment. Last year in Maine this number accounted for approximately 
30 children,  not able to continue in HS due to their family’s economic condition improving. 
These children need the continued service Head Start offers to prevent a break -in-service 
between Early Head Start and when enrollment in the public pre -k system is available. Head 
Start is the program that supports eligible 3-year olds in school readiness outcomes  when other 
public pre- k is not available. Raising income guidelines for these vulnerable families and 
children is the right thing to do.  
 Thank you for your time and your support for LD 1726. This legislation is a lifeline for families as 
they work to improve the economic conditions that impact them daily. When families do better, children do better. For the future of Maine, please support them to achieve a sustainabl e life.  
 Sincerely,  
 
 
Sue Powers,  
MeCAP and MHSDA  
 
