 
 
 
Contact: Tina Jennings Association Director of Community & Youth Engagement  
YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston  
P: 207-784-4995 E: tjennings@alymca.org 
Testimony of Tina Jennings before  
the Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of 
LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child Care  
for Working Families 
May 10th, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Tina Jennings and I’m the Association Director of Community & Youth Engagement 
at the YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston. I support LD 1726: An Act to Build Maine's Economy by Supporting Child 
Care for Working Families. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve thousands of 
children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, and summer camp. 
These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, and are a critical component of 
our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our economy.  
 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for my YMCA.  
 
1) Improvements to the childcare subsidy program: The shift from attendance-based to 
enrollment-based reimbursement for childcare subsidy is an important step in making this critical 
program work for families and providers. Enrollment-based reimbursement is a more stable and 
sustainable funding mechanism for providers, meaning we will be better equipped to meet the 
needs of our communities. We also support policies that allow more families in need to access this 
support. 
 
It is not the childcare provider’s fault when a child on subsidy is absent, yet we bear the financial burden 
of absenteeism. This reality makes it difficult to sustain programming when we experience unplanned 
losses, and frankly we have considered reducing the number of slots we make available to families on 
subsidy. It pains us to even consider this, since it runs contrary to our mission; however, we have to 
balance our budget just like any business. In our community, the need for subsidized childcare slots is 
huge, and we strongly desire to keep serving those families in our community. This program must make 
more financial and administrative sense for providers to make it more available to families that need it.  
 
2) Doubling the monthly wage supplement for all childcare workers is a critical investment in 
our most important asset – the skilled early educators that teach our state’s children and allow us 
to offer consistent care for working families. Recruiting and retaining qualified staff has been an 
incredible challenge for us, and impacts the number of children we can serve. 
 
Increasing the wage supplement will be instrumental in retaining the childcare workforce.  
In a time where GOOD staff are leaving the field to work in jobs that require much less mental and 
physical commitment, we need help. Staff are going to fast food jobs, box store retail, etc. and making 
more than we can offer them. It has been extremely difficult to hire and retain any staff, never mind 
qualified staff that care about children, children’s development and working with family units as whole.  
Please help us to keep staff in the field and to make this field more appealing to others.  
 
Working with children is hard work, ensuring they are ready to enter elementary school and are meeting 
their developmental milestones is hard work. Early Childhood Educators should be appropriately 
compensated for this important and skilled work!  
 
