Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Distinguished Members of the 
Transportation Committee:  
My name is Anne Gass and I’m writing to urge you to pass LD 1634 , which would allow 
municipalities to set their own speed limits on state roads.  
I live in Gray, which has three busy sta te routes carving through  it; Routes  26, 100, and 
115/202 , along with the Maine Turnp ike. We struggle with the negative effects of this  
traffic every day .  
In 20 12 I formed a Bike -Ped Committee in Gray to focus on safety  for walkers and bikers . 
We subsequently wrote and obtained Council approval of the Town ’s first ever  Bike -Ped 
plans (2013, and an updated one in 2018). We also helped draft and received Council 
approval of a Complete Stre ets Policy ( 2020).  
In support of our first Bike -Ped plan our committee did a community survey  in which we 
asked where people liked to walk and bike in Gray, or if they didn ’t, what prevented 
them from  doing so. About half o f all re spondents reported that too many cars/cars 
driving too fast made them unwilling to w alk or bike a t all.  
The Town of Gray is working closely  with MaineDOT on a plan to reconstruct the roads in  
our village center, which has one of the worst intersections in Southern Maine . The 
community has really stepped up to create and support a design that  will make the 
village more bike and pedestrian friend ly; this work  is supported by our 2020 
Comprehensive Plan an d by a community planning pro cess in  July 2022 which involved 
200 residents . The Town is preparing to commit significant financial resou rces to this 
reconstruction project.  
We have requested that Mai neDOT lower speed limits through the villag e and in other 
more populated areas of town  and have been unsuccessful . Quite simply, MaineDOT ’s 
perceives its job to be helping more traffic move more quickly on the state  roads in our 
town , regardless of the  impact on the health, safety, and quality of life of the people 
who live on those roads.  
There is abundant data showing that if a car traveling at above 35 mph hits a person the 
result will be sever e injury  or death. Lower speeds save lives and  cost impatient drivers 
only a minute or two more of their time. Since drivers ge nerally exceed the posted spee d 
limit, a post ed speed of 45 mph can easily mean 55mph.  
If MaineDOT is unwilling to lower speeds in busy residential areas then the towns should  
have the right to do so  to maintain publi c safety and quality of life .  
