Daniel Ostrye
Yarmouth
LD 1634
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation,
My name is Daniel P Ostrye and I live in Yarmouth, ME.  I would like to encourage 
the committee to amend LD 1634 as proposed.  I served as chair of the Yarmouth 
Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee from 2009 to 2021 and remain an active 
participant in the community on matters related to bicycle and pedestrian safety.  
Over the years I have watched with growing frustration as MDOT has modified speed
limits on local roads without regard to the impact to cyclists and pedestrians by using 
the 85th percentile recorded speeds as the sole basis for making their determination.  
In one case this resulted in raising the speed limit from 25 mph to 30 mph in the 
section of  W Elm Street where three of our four schools while leaving the 25 mph 
speed limit in the residential section of the street.  This action was taken against the 
recommendations of our chief of police, town manager and town council who were 
concerned with the safety of our school children.  We are proud of the fact that we 
have a very large part of our school population who walk or ride to school in all 
seasons and I would like to see the legislation changed to allow the Town to 
selectively modify speed limits in context sensitive areas of our community.
Our town has had a Complete Streets Plan in effect since 2015 and our Complete 
Streets Advisory Committee has developed and implemented infrastructure 
improvements that make our town a safer place for ALL users.  However, we 
continue to be frustrated by the imposition of speed limits by MDOT that do not 
reflect the context of the road setting and rely solely on speed measurements to set 
speed limits.  The current law creates an "all or none" burden on the town to either 
assume responsibility for setting speed limits on our local roads or have no control.  
The proposed modifications to the law will give our town a critically needed tool to 
further our complete streets goal of making our roads safe for all users in our 
community.
Respectfully submitted,
Dan Ostrye
22 Spartina Point Road
Yarmouth, ME  04096  
