Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Ed Libby and I live in Yarmouth and I am 
here to testify in support of LD 1634. 
 
I am a frequent walker and biker as a means of commuting the couple miles to and from my 
office.  I do this for my own health, both mental and physical, as well as the health of our planet.  
 
I also am active is housing new Mainers, who are not allowed to drive, and rely on walking and 
biking as their primary means of transportation.   
 
I support this bill for all the reasons below, but would emphasize that it simply makes common 
sense for municipalities to adapt their speed limits to their local efforts to accommodate walkers 
and bikers by adopting complete street policies rather than wait for the State and its outdated 
methodologies. 
 
Let’s make it safer for all Mainers by allowing local decisions to be made locally. 
 
Equity: Slower speeds are key to making streets feel safe and inviting for more people who walk, bike, 
and use mobility devices, which is critical for people who lack the option of driving. 
Transportation Safety and Choice: Maine people love to walk and bike, but increasingly people feel 
unsafe on our roads. If we want to increase transportation choice, we must make our roads safer for 
everyone. 
Climate Action: Slowing traffic in activity centers enables more people to walk, bike, and roll for day-to-
day trips, which reduces vehicle miles traveled. 
Fiscal health: This bill will lead to slower speeds in areas where people live and run businesses, 
increasing real estate values and retail activity, directly increasing local tax base. 
Economic Development: This bill will allow municipalities to slow vehicle speeds in downtowns and 
village centers, where it is critical for people to feel safe and comfortable walking in order to 
conveniently and efficiently access shops and businesses. Data shows slower safer streets increase retail 
sales, economic activity, and investment. 
Quality of Life: Safe streets are a critical factor for enabling Mainers to be physically active and socially 
connected in their communities. 
