Jason Shiers
Norway
LD 1634
Essentially, I am here to support LD 1634 as it will help municipalities streamline 
safety and the development of their comprehensive planning relative to growth and 
health of their communities.
In my experience in construction, safety shouldn’t involve a lot of red tape. I wish to 
describe my situation as a small town business developer to help provide a clear 
example of how this bill is an important step forward for folks like me and towns like 
Norway.
In many Maine towns, Main Streets are also state highways, as is the case in Norway, 
where routes 117 & 118 traverse. As downtowns in places like Norway revitalize and 
grow, their Main Streets begin to include areas not exactly on Main Street where 
people wish to walk, exercise, enjoy, shop, play, work and live. For example, in 
Norway, the efforts of the Western Foothills Land Trust have created incredible 
opportunities for residents and destination seekers to gain better access to the 
outdoors.
My project–Lakeside Norway–seeks to further these efforts. We’re located less than a
quarter mile west of the end of Main Street on 6.6-acres of historic commercial 
property, with over 1400-linear feet of shoreline of Lake Pennesseewassee. We are 
renovating an old warehouse to help Norway Brewing Company to expand; creating 
new boat slip rental and outdoor recreation spaces for public and private use; and 
establishing an outdoor retail garden center that localizes green solutions relative to 
climate change and lake water quality issues.
The underlying mission of Lakeside Norway aims to connect (or re-connect, that is) 
our residential and business downtown communities with the lake so that they can 
directly access and share the lake from downtown. In addition, we’re also creating 
coalitions with local charities—such as the Maine Dragon Boat Club, the Cancer 
Resource Center of Western Maine and Western Maine Recovery Center—to provide 
inclusive lake-based four-season outdoor recreation, educational programing and 
entertainment-driven fundraising. Furthermore, our property abuts both town-owned 
and land-trust preservation areas with amazing trail systems, which will become 
accessible from our shoreline during all four seasons of the year.
There is a town-maintained sidewalk that extends from Main Street past our property, 
along 15 residential homes, past a popular marina and terminates across the highway 
(Lake Road) at a staple dining establishment frequented by local and seasonal 
residents. Currently, the speed limit leaving Main Street where it becomes Lake Road 
(rt 118) changes from 25 mph to 40 mph, which makes for dangerous pedestrian 
crossing; also limiting the use of the maintained sidewalk.
While we have a town-approved site plan designed, we’re unable to have crosswalks 
installed on this stretch of road, as it is a state highway with a speed limit above 
35-mph. Our Town Manager has informed us that there is significant red tape 
involved to get the MDOT to reduce the speed limit. While the LD 1634 may not be 
able to apply to our situation, it is an important step to help empower municipalities to
be able to make better decisions and take more immediate actions regarding public 
safety on state roads that extend through their developing Main Street areas. 
Providing public safety for their community is a municipality responsibility.
Thank you, Jason Shiers
