 
S:\PLANNING\ ADMINISTRATION \STATE RELATED (LEGISLATION) \16 POLICY ITEMS 2023 \WESTBROOK - FRANCESCHI - LD1634  04 -25-23 P UBLIC HEARING.DOCX     
  Page 1 of 1 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  April 24, 2023  
 
RE: LD 1634 -  An Act to Grant Municipalities the Authority to Set Certain Lower Motor Vehicle Speed Limits 
Without a Department of Transportation Speed Study  
 
Senator  Chipman , Representative Williams  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation : 
 
My name is Jennie P oulin  Franceschi , P.E . I am the Director of Planning and Code Enforcement for the City of 
Westbrook.  On behalf of the Mayor & City Staff, we  would like to provide testimony regarding LD1 634 An Act 
to Grant Municipalities the Authority to Set Certain Lower Motor Vehicle Speed Limits Without a Department of 
Transportation Speed Study  with the recommendation of OUGHT  NOT  TO PASS.   
 
This bill will not create safer roads by removing the protective review of MDOT & Maine State Police. 
Westbrook concur s with the testimony of MDOT.   We feel communities are well served by the current system of 
review and to remov e that review system will not create safer roads for all modes of transportation.  This could 
also create a liability for municipalities as they would assume responsibility for roads where speed limits are 
changed without proper study.  
  
This bill will further  put local Police Dep artments in a position of conflict where speed limits being set without 
proper study and physical changes to the road will not reduce motorist speed.  Police Departments are maxed out 
with the level of enforcement they have to currentl y conduct, but when you have arbitrary changes in speed limits, 
motorist will not change their habits and local residents  will feel frustrated at the “lack of response” from Police 
Departments that cannot feasibly be expected to be sitting at every locatio n where speed limit changes are 
considered problematic.   
 
Additionally, local Police Departments do not have the expertise on staff to conduct the traffic studies needed  to 
make speed limit changes  and nor do they have the bandwidth to take on this task wi th their overwhelming 
workload.  
 
It is a dangerous situation to just change speed  limits  and the result could  cause more accidents.   The science used 
by MDOT in conjunction with review of the Maine State Police, benefits all municipalities in keeping our 
roadways consistently reviewed & treated so the traveling motorist going through various communities have a 
consisten t expectation of enforcement and how to travel along Maine Roads .  The pedestrian & bicyclist using 
these roads also have the correct expectation of the road system to ensure their safety as well.    As mentioned in 
MDOT's testimony, MDOT works with municipalities to address  known safety  concerns through installation of 
traffic control measures.   This offer is available to any community that reaches out and is the way to make our 
roads safer, not  by removing traffic studies and the review of MDOT & Maine Sta te Police.  
 
Our communities are currently better served with the traffic study  review process and the improved outreach of 
MDOT to collaborate with communities on known safety issues in their communities.  
 
We thank you for your time and consideration of our comments.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
Jennie Poulin  Franceschi , P.E.   Chief Sean Lally  Michael T. Foley  Eric S. Dudley, P.E.  
Director of Planning    Chief of Police        Mayor   Director of Engineering  
and Code Enforcement          and Public Services  
