 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 1634, "An Act to Grant Municipalities the Authority to Set Certain Lower Motor Vehicle 
Speed Limits Without a Department of Transportation Speed Study " 
25 April 2023 
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on Transportation, I 
am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western 
Maine in the State Senate.  I am pleased to present LD 1634, "An Act to Grant Municipalities the 
Authority to Set Certain Lower Motor Vehicle Speed Limits Without a Department of 
Transportation Speed Study.” 
 
This bill gives municipalities local control by allowing them to more efficiently lower speed 
limits.  
 
Currently, in order to lower speed limits on local roads, towns and cities must receive permission 
from the Maine Department of Transportation. Additionally, in order to change the speed limit 
on a single road within a municipality, current Maine law requires the municipality to take over 
the setting of speed limits on all roads. 
 
The bill allows municipalities to change a speed limit on a single road without taking 
responsibility for setting and managing speed limits on all roads within the municipality. It 
allows municipalities to reduce speed limits by up to 10 miles per hour in particular areas to no 
lower than 20 miles per hour and to make physical road changes to promote better speed limit 
compliance. The bill requires that municipalities that want to lower speed limits receive public 
input, review safety deficiencies, and report five years of data to the Legislature on motor vehicle 
speeds, pedestrian counts, and bicycle counts before and after the change.  
 
Maine’s current process for setting speed limits, which relies on the 85th percentile rule, is 
outdated and problematic. The 85th percentile rule has dominated US traffic engineering since 
the 1960s. The 85th percentile is the speed at or below which 85% of drivers will drive with open 
roads and favorable conditions. This methodology is biased toward higher speeds as a huge 
percentage of people drive faster than the speed limit. Several states, notably Minnesota and 
Oregon, have moved away from the 85th percentile rule.  
 
Despite new technologies making cars safer, the rate of fatal car crashes has been increasing for 
the past several years. The number of fatal crashes increased by over 7% from 2019 to 2020 (a 
year where far fewer drivers were on the road) and by more than 10% from 2020 to 2021. In 
2017, the NTSB reported that speeding accounts for about 10,000 deaths a year—as many as 
drunk driving. Additionally, the number of pedestrian fatalities has been increasing steadily for 
over a decade. In the 10-year period from 2009 to 2018, pedestrian fatalities increased by 53%.  
 
Many civil engineers hold the belief that lowering speed limits without changing the design can 
be dangerous. However, a growing body of evidence, including a study by the Insurance Institute 
for Highway Safety, disputes this belief.  
 
Another misconception is that lowering speed limits will have negative economic impacts due to 
delays. However, it has been found that lowering speed limits has a negligible increase on travel 
time.  
 
There are numerous other positive impacts from lowering speeds limits. Slower speed limits 
make streets feel safer for people who walk and bike. This has positive economic and 
environmental effects.  
 
Thank you.  I would be happy to answer any questions.  
