[( Central Maine coMMuN|-I-Y COLLEGE Oﬂice0fthePresidem ‘ 
To: Senator Peggy Rotundo 
Representative Melanie Sachs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
From: Dr. Betsy Libby, President 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 503, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund the 
Maine Community College System 
Date: April 26, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Betsy Libby, and I am the President of Central Maine 
Community College. A bond to fund general repairs, deferred maintenance items, modernization of 
campus buildings and educational equipment is much needed for all seven of Maine’s Community 
Colleges. Each MCCS campus has our own specific needs that differ from institution to institution. I am 
grateful to be able to have the opportunity to speak with you today about some of Central Maine 
Community College’s needs. . 
Our largest building, Jalbert Hall, was built in the l960’s. Since then, wings of the building have been 
updated and modernized, but not all of them. The wing most in need of updating is the one that houses 
our automotive technology department. Making improvements in that area will provide opportunities for 
the program to further expand innovation and enhance education particularly for electronic vehicle 
maintenance and repair. Outside of this wing, on other exterior areas on campus, general repairs are 
needed to walkways, stairs and parking lots. Also, building exteriors are in need of sealing and caulking. 
Many of the College’s career technical programs need more space to educate students to prepare them to 
enter Maine’s workforce. I will use nursing and heating ventilation air conditioning ——HVAC—as 
examples. Both are industries with workforce shortages in Maine. The college has prepared a plan to 
increase the number of nursing students enrolled each year from 64 to 104. This includes a day program, 
evening and weekend programs, along with a program in rural Maine to meet students when and where 
they are available to be educated. With more equipment and simulation resources, we will grow this even 
fuither. 
In HVAC, We found ourselves in a position in August where there were more students than we had space. 
We reworked the schedule and use of space to be able to double capacity in the program. It wasa 
challenge, it was tight, but we did it. When the HVAC program started in 2019, there were 15 students 
and that has grown by 170% today. With more equipment, we could educate more students in these high- 
need well-paying ﬁelds. For some of these programs we just don’t have the right space in the right place. 
With some resources we can help reconﬁgure our spaces to meet today’s needs. 
I250 Turner Street ' Auburn, ME 04210-6498 ~ (207) 755-5250 - blibby@cmcc.edu
[( Central Maine COMMUNITY COLLEGE 0ﬁ?¢‘@0f!h@Pr@Sid@" ’ 
We are currently going through a year-long process of much needed roof repairs at the college. We will 
need ongoing continuing maintenance on the investment, which this bond would provide. I know other 
MCCS campuses also have this same concern. 
We have several boilers that need updating. There are aging heating and AC systems that need 
maintenance or repairs. Through conversations with my fellow presidents, I know other campuses have 
similar needs. 
Unfortunately, in this day and age institutions need to be increasingly concerned with campus safety 
planning and response. This bond would provide the opportunity to modemize facilities with the latest 
security such as automatic door locking mechanisms and enhanced exterior lighting. College campuses 
take the health and safety of our students and employees very seriously and available funding would be 
used wisely. 
I hope these examples are helpﬁil as you consider LD 503. Thank you very much for the opportunity to 
speak with you today. I am happy to answer any questions. 
1250 Turner Street '/luburn, ME 04210-6498 ' (207) 755-5250 ' blibby@cmcc.edu
