7 ‘ii 
ital 
t"l€)l“s/i M U N ITY 
é'.§tf.”;t_i“ ..t..ft3liII%1i:i 
To: Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
From: Joseph Cassidy, President, Southern Maine Community College 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 503, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond 
Issue to Fund the Maine Community College System 
Date: April 26, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committees 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Joe Cassidy, and lam the President 
of Southern Maine Community College. l am here today to strongly support LD503, An 
Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond to Fund the Maine Community College 
System. First, l would like to thank Senator Daughtry for her long-standing support of 
SMCC, her hometown community college. 
Having served as President of Washington County Community College, Interim President 
of Eastern Maine Community College, and currently President of Southern Maine 
Community College, I understand the broad scope of needs for the MCCS to reach its 
mission of creating an educated, skilled and adaptable labor force that is responsive to 
the changing needs of the Maine economy. 
Speaking specifically to SMCC, as priorities have changed over time and new 
opportunities have emerged, we have responded creatively by initiating new programs, 
renovating existing facilities, and leasing and constructing new space. However, 
significant portions of necessary work remain untouched. 
¢ At the time of SMCC's Facilities Master Plan from 2017, nearly $50 million in 
needed capital and maintenance projects alone were identified, and the need is 
currently greater due to escalated construction costs. 
0 SMCC's South Portland Campus alone currently has approximately 40 buildings, 
many of which were part of the original Fort Preble and are over 100 years in 
age. The need for repairing brick veneers, roofs, windows, and doors is essential 
to extend the useful life of many of these key buildings. 
0 Funds are essential to repurpose and expand existing buildings and spaces to be 
South Portland Campus Midcoast Campus 
2 I on R0 1d South l’o1'tlantl, Mai11c 04106 Z9 Scwzxll Street ° Bruns\vicl< \l1mc ll/llii l 
Phone 207 74la550() Phone 20" 844 2li)2 
state-of-the-art, ultimately increasing the number of graduates from our trade 
WWW.smccME.edu
state-of-the-art, ultimately increasing the number of graduates from our trade 
programs. A prime example of this is our Health Sciences building which has 
numerous office suites that could relocated to expand single-level instructional 
space with simulation labs. 
0 The addition of air conditioning units are a simple, yet costly, fix that would allow 
for increased instruction during Summer term. 
0 To support ADA standards and guidelines and the instruction and safety of 
students and visitors, improvements are needed to exterior and interior campus 
signage, roadway/parking lights, and lighted bollards, and the structure of old 
Fort Preble. 
0 increased funds will allow us to improve our energy efficiency and be better 
environmental stewards by reducing our environmental footprint, all while 
saving significantly on our operating expenses. 
Providing this support goes hand in hand with revitalizing and fulfilling Maine's 
workforce needs. Through the expansion and improvement of MCCS facilities, increased 
access will be provided to those seeking a quality education that will not only improve 
their lives but contribute to their communities in meaningful ways. 
I provide my full support of this bill and hope you will give it your full consideration. 
With appreciation, 
Joseph Cassidy 
President of Southern Maine Community College 
2 Fort Road 
South Portland, ME 04106
