 
1 
 
 
  131st Legislature 
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 23 
 
    
Senator Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Majority Leader 
3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Office (207) 287-1515 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing 
LD 503, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund the Maine 
Community College System 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
April 26, 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly 
represent Senate District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, 
Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce LD 503, “An Act to 
Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund the Maine Community College System.”  
 
LD 503 would provide funds for general repairs, deferred maintenance items, modernization of 
campus buildings, and educational equipment at all 7 campuses of the Maine Community 
College System (MCCS). It has been 5 years since the Legislature approved – and Maine voters 
strongly supported – a small $15 million bond for MCCS. In the following years, Maine has 
come to rely heavily on MCCS to assist with a number of challenges. Each time, they have risen 
to the occasion. 
 
I’ll list a few examples here. MCCS designed secure ballot drop boxes and designed and printed 
respirator splitters and face shields to help Maine through the COVID-19 pandemic. MCCS 
helped get trained Mainers into classrooms when teachers and other PK-12 staff had to work 
remotely due to COVID-19 outbreaks. MCCS contributed equipment and staff to help meet 
health care needs. 
 
Now, Maine was fortunate to have dedicated funds to allow MCCS to ramp up and launch 
hundreds of new training programs in order to boost the economy. Maine Jobs and Recovery 
Funds were allocated to MCCS, and these funds are being used to train thousands of Maine 
workers in all industries from health care and precision machining to electric vehicle repair, heat 
pump installation, and welding.  
 
Through these actions, MCCS has proven that it is a careful and effective steward of state 
dollars. For this reason, the Legislature supported the proposal for Free Community College. As 
a result, enrollment is up across MCCS, and more young Mainers are seeing community college 
as an option. Now is the time to ensure that MCCS student can learn in appropriate space and a 
safe environment that helps them prepare for their future careers. 
 
2 
  
To be clear, none of the COVID-19 funding that MCCS received since the last bond can be used 
to repair, renovate, or replace the aging infrastructure on their campuses and at their satellite 
locations. Additionally, the current Part II of the biennial budget has earmarks to continue free 
college and for wage increases and other ongoing costs. But again, these funds cannot be used to 
repair, renovate, or replace HVAC systems, roofs, or sidewalks.  
 
Below are a few examples of how each of the colleges would use their portion of the bond 
revenue. 
 
NMCC Improve security systems and parking lots 
EMCC Replace roof, improve sidewalk and parking lot safety 
WCCC Pointing bricks and improving residence halls 
SMCC Point bricks, improving HVAC systems and learning spaces 
CMCC Updating HVAC systems 
YCCC Improving HVAC systems, building hyflex classroom space, and enhacing 
parking lot safety 
KVCC Repairing roof and windows, improving HVAC systems, and paving 
 
If I missed anything (and I’m sure I did!), then I know that representatives from MCCS will also 
be testifying today and would be available for the work session to go into more detail. 
 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 
 
 
Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23 
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth 
 

