State of Maine 
DEPARTIVLENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Beth Lambert, Director of Innovative Instruction 
Neither For Nor Against: L.D. l 144 
An Act to Ban Monitoring Software Targeting Maine Students 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Senator Tipping 
Co-Sponsored by: Senators Brakey and Grohoski and Representatives Millikin and O’Neal 
Date: April 5, 2023 _ 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Beth Lambert and I am here representing the Department of Education speaking 
neither for nor against LD 1144, An Act to Ban Monitoring Software Targeting Maine Students. 
LD 1144 proposes that school administrative units (SAUs) be prohibited from installing 
monitoring software on a student electronic device that may be used by the student outside of- 
school. 
Maine schools use monitoring software to keep students safe by identifying potential threats to 
school-wide and individual student safety, including content indicating violence, bullying, or an 
intention to self-harm. They also use it to control for potential compliance issues including 
monitoring and restricting students ’ access to content that may be inappropriate or harmful to 
minors. Network and device filters are examples of this. In fact, The Children ’s Internet 
Protection Act §CIPA 1, a federal law, requires any school that receives e-rate funding to 
monitoring and filter online content that is inappropriate, obscene, or hannful to minors. All but 
one of Maine’s SAUs, through their membership in the Maine School Library Network (MSLN), 
agree that they will follow these CIPA requirements. The Maine School and Library Network is 
a consortium consisting of almost 1000 schools and libraries across the state of Maine through 
which participants acquire Internet access, local loop circuits and other related services. Services 
provided by MSLN are paid for using a combination of funding from the Federal E-Rate 
program, the Maine Telecommunications Education Access Fund (MTBAF), and the Maine 
Department of Education. 
Based on discussions with the sponsor, We believe that they understand our concerns about this 
bill. First, we are very concerned that prohibiting monitoring software as deﬁned by LD 1144 
would likely lead to SAUs making the decision to not allow devices to leave the school. This 
will put Maine students at an incredible disadvantage, especially Maine’s most disadvantaged 
students. Second, we do not believe we have enough data about the use of such software in our 
schools to make an informed decision about the parameters of use that best serves all of Maine 
students and all of Maine’s communities. Third, we wonder about how the policies and practices 
around technology use in SAUs and the State sponsorship of devices in schools interfaces with
1
the privacy protections outlined in this bill. We believe these concerns and questions need to be 
fully explored and addressed before legislation regarding prohibitions on monitoring software in 
schools be considered." 
Therefore, the Department is speaking neither for nor against LD 1144, An Act to Ban 
Monitoring Software Targeting Maine Students. I would be happy to answer any questions the 
Committee may have, and I will be available for work sessions on this bill.
2
