 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. K ing    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Teleph one: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 1144  
 
AN ACT TO BAN MONITORING SOFTWARE TARGETING MAINE STUDENTS  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I am 
Eileen King, deputy executive director of  Main e School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association , in 
opposition to  L.D. 1144 . 
 
Student  academic success and the safety and security of ou r schools  are priorities for all of our school districts . 
When schools were forced to go remote, we found ourselves in unfamiliar territor y when it came to keeping our 
students safe while providing robust educational learning experiences for our students.  
 
Software most commonly use d includes  Zoom  and Google Meet  for conferencing as part of classroom  learning 
activities. Many other distric ts use IXL that tracks academic performance. These platforms do live on the devices 
that schools provide to our students . 
 
When i t comes to student safety, Bark Technologies , Gaggle.Net , and  Securly  Inc. are three companies that can 
scan student emails,  texts , documents, and in some  cases, social media activity. By flagging key words, t hey look 
for warning signs of cyber bullying, sexting, drug and alcohol use, depression, and to flag students who may pose a 
violent risk not only to themselves, but classmates.  Students will often co mmunicate before a violent act happens , 
and quite often , they will communicate electronically. If we don’t have  the means to hear those cries out for help , 
you’re going to have children in jeopardy.  
 
When potential problems are found , and depending on the se verity, school administrators, parents  – and under the 
most extreme cases – law enforcement officials, are alerted. One instance included  a third -grade  girl who was 
getting solicited by an outside email address asking for nude pict ures or that person was going to kill her parents . 
She tried to send those pictures but because  these services are run  live, the content never got out  and the person 
was arrested.  
 
Searches monitored by  these platforms have  included  “how to make a bomb ” and “how to kill yourself ”. Another 
recent example involved a student who searched for “painless ways to kill yourself ” and watched  YouTube videos 
on the topic . Administrators and paren ts are alerted about these searches.  
 
The algorithms  of the securing plat forms  are constantly being updated to detect the tone of despair in a message, to 
pick up symbols and misspellings, and to better analyze language.  
 
Not all schools are using these platforms, but those that are , choose to have a student safety platform in place to 
ensure that online conversations are positive. When communications are not , this type of technology can step up to 
identify the issue, alert the district and take the appropriate measures to keep students safe and secure.  
