PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, Esq.  
LD 1 144 – Ought to Pass  
An Act to Ban Monitoring Software Targeting Maine Students  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
April 5, 2023 
Senat or Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I 
am policy counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization 
committe d to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions through advocacy, education, a nd litigation. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you t o support this bill.  
For years, companies have been aggressivel y marketing invasive and exploitative 
technologies to schools as a quick fix for school safety. The pandemic’s lockdown period, 
when almost all students logged into the classroom remotely, gave these companies an 
unprecedented business opport unity. But these technologies pose massive risks to student 
privacy and safety, a nd schools are no place for biased surveillance technologies that do little 
to make learning environments safer. Unfortunatel y, a grow ing number of schools throughout 
the country are showing interest in these error-prone technologies. Not only do these 
technologies risk invading the privacy of students and their families, but they might also run 
afoul of Maine’s strongest- in-the-nation face surveillance ban. See 25 MRS §6001(2) (banning 
facial surveillance by public officials, includi ng by contractors). Indee d, last year a Human 
Rights Watch investigation revealed that some companies that made their remote learning apps 
free secretly shared millions of children’s data with marketers and data brokers.1 
1 Drew Harwell, Remote learning apps shared children’s data at a ‘dizzying scale' , Wash. Po., May 24, 2022, 
available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/05/24/remote -school -app-tracking -privacy/ . 
 
As a nation, we face an unprecedented problems of profit -driven collection, sale, and 
analysis of student data. We urge you vote ought to pass  on LD 1144 to protect  Maine  students 
from pernicious and intrusive surveillance.  
 
 
 
 
