LD 1643 " An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, 
Evaluations and Events at Public Schools" 
 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my 
testimony in support of LD 1643 “An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, 
Evaluations and Events at Public Schools.” 
It is no secret that classrooms and schools have become political battle grounds where a small 
fraction of “educators” are more activists and recruiters for their ideology than educators. Reviewing of 
the states NWEA scores would also confirm this. By enforcing this policy, our classrooms would once 
again be “neutral” ground where a child can learn “how to think,” instead of being taught “what to 
think.” 
Parents and guardians should be able to review without opposition all material their child or 
children will be exposed to within a classroom. This is called transparency and it also builds trust. A trust 
that has been violated in recent years by a very small fraction of activists posing as educators. 
All surveys should be reviewed by the parent or guardian prior to them being assigned. This will also 
parents and guardians to either assist the educator in answering any sensitive questions, trauma related 
issues or outright opt out. This is called transparency and it will also build trust with all parties involved. 
Parents and guardians should be allowed to opt out on any curriculum, or events they deemed unfit, 
go against their beliefs or religious views. 
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1643 “An Act Regarding Instructional 
Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations and Events at Public Schools.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1643
LD 1643 " An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations 
and Events at Public Schools"
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of LD 1643 “An Act 
Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations and Events at 
Public Schools.”
It is no secret that classrooms and schools have become political battle grounds where
a small fraction of “educators” are more activists and recruiters for their ideology than
educators. Reviewing of the states NWEA scores would also confirm this. By 
enforcing this policy, our classrooms would once again be “neutral” ground where a 
child can learn “how to think,” instead of being taught “what to think.”
Parents and guardians should be able to review without opposition all material their 
child or children will be exposed to within a classroom. This is called transparency 
and it also builds trust. A trust that has been violated in recent years by a very small 
fraction of activists posing as educators.
All surveys should be reviewed by the parent or guardian prior to them being 
assigned. This will also parents and guardians to either assist the educator in 
answering any sensitive questions, trauma related issues or outright opt out. This is 
called transparency and it will also build trust with all parties involved.
Parents and guardians should be allowed to opt out on any curriculum, or events they 
deemed unfit, go against their beliefs or religious views.
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1643 “An Act Regarding 
Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations and Events at Public 
Schools.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
