' 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE Housn STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
1 TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Heidi H. Sampson 
465 Kennebunk Road 
Alfred, ME 04002 
Cell Phone: (207) 590-1909 
Heidi Sampson@legislature.maine.gov 
May 11, 2023 
Testimony in 
Support of 
LD 1643 An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations 
and Events at Public Schools 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed colleagues on the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee. I am Heidi Sampson representing the good people of House 
District 136, Alfred and parts of Lyman and Waterboro. I am before you today to present 
LD 1643 An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations 
and Events at Public Schools. 
Parents have a strong inﬂuence on their child. It is a direct inﬂuence, Which is stronger 
than that of teachers, friends, and media. Countless studies have come to similar 
conclusions determining parental involvement in education and schools is beneﬁcial for 
students. Most parents would agree this is self-evident. 
Parents involvement leads to reduced absenteeism 
It promotes better student behavior 
Increases student achievement 
Improves and promotes both parent and teacher satisfaction 
It leads to a continuously positive learning environment in school and at home. 
What does this have to do with my bill? Everything. 
The premise of this bill is quite simple. Public Schools are supported by taxpayers. The 
most visible ones are the parents. What is publicly funded must be accessible and 
available for inspection, questioning and input. This includes the inspection of 
instructional materials, surveys, evaluations and communications by parents or guardians 
Sadly, we are seeing increased conﬂicts With parents, school boards and administrators. 
Parents are upset. Why‘? Personal, family autonomy and privacy is being violated. A 
School system may not take over the role as parent. They are paid to teach academics not 
to force ideologies on children trying to mold them a certain way. 
Our education system has seen a dramatic shift from academic instruction to behavior 
modiﬁcation methodologies. This is done through data collection of a child’s attitude, 
values and belief systems. Once comprehensive data is gathered, it is easy to modify the 
instruction to become a training mechanism, thereby manipulating young children into 
conforming to the state’s SEL standards. This is not academic knowledge. This is 
behavior modiﬁcation no different from training an animal. Unlike animals, children 
have dreams, goals and aspiration that must be nurtured. My motto, ‘Find the ﬂicker, fan 
the ﬂame’ . Teaching should not be manipulating.
Why this dramatic shift? Data! The new gold to be mined is our children ’s data. 
This effort has been in the blueprint plans for decades. But sparing you the lengthy 
history, I will highlight a recent, huge shift that is generating mountains of data on our 
children and it is in a permanent record parents have no idea about and one they can not 
access. 
In 2011 the Common Core was adopted. Did you know that each and every standard is 
now a data point? This collected data is stored in the State Longitudinal Data System 
created in 2009 with every state in the nation having the exact same system put in place. 
The data collected is not academic in nature. It is the harvesting of biometric data about 
every child in the public education system tracking them from K-12 through to their 
career. This has been the advent and explosion of biometric data harvesting. 
It's not just in Maine, this is a national effort to increase the non-consensual 
surveillance of free-born American citizens, and the probability of creating a 
comprehensive national database on every American. HR 4174/S 2046,1 the 
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (FEPA) became federal law in 2017 
and contains these objectives. 
We in Maine are deeply engaged in Invasive Data Collection for Long Term 
Tracking 
Biometrics data is gathered through Habits of Work/Habits of Mind smveys as well as 
micro assessments and all other assessments for that matter, which are largely non- 
academic information. Assessments inherently are psychological proﬁles whereas 
achievement tests are academic in nature. The two are mutually exclusive. 
For example: 
School children are given sexually graphic, psychologically intrusive surveys without 
parents’ knowledge. These surveys also ask youth to reveal their criminal activity, 
personal family matters, and other intimate issues. Although we are told these surveys are 
anonymous, any data specialist can identify an individual with as few as 3 points of data, 
In the early adoption of Common Core, the ‘biometric ’ data gathering was for “Efficacy 
of School wide Programs to Promote Social and Character Development and Reduce 
Problem Behavior in Elementary School Children ” How has this helped? Over the past 
l0 years we keep hearing these issues have gotten worse, yet we double down. 
Below is a list of some of the information that is gathered. 
Cl Personal Identiﬁable Information; Name, Nickname, Birthdate, Physical 
Characteristics. . .' 
El Bus routes, Bus times, Arrival times 
U Behavior — Interpersonal: Communication, Collaboration, Leadership... 
El Discipline Record 
Cl Attitudes 
Cl Compliance 
El Behavior - Intrapersonal: Self- Regulation, Perseverance, Grit, Tenacity... 
El Medical Record 
Cl Health Habits 
El IEP (Learning Disabilities) 
CI Eating Habits 
El Non School Activities 
Cl Screen Name 
1 
httQ:[[bit.ly[2ynay2e
El Voting status (parents) 
E] Religious affiliation 
El Family income range... 
E] ETC.... 
Why do schools need this information? Why is-there such an invasion of privacy, covertly 
executed in the schools, often on laptops, hidden from view of parents? 
Parents have a right to know and a right to object. 
In conclusion, we must consider the overarching plan in place. We as policy makers have 
the authority to stand up now and protect our littlest citizens from this continued stealthy 
privacy invasion and honor their parents. 
Marc Tuckerz -1992 wrote his famous “Dear Hillary” Letter 
We plan to “remold the entire American system" into "a seamless web that literally 
extends from cradle to grave and is the same system for everyone," coordinated by 
"a system of labor market boards at the local, state and federal levels" where 
curriculum and "job matching" will be handled by counselors "accessing the 
integrated computer-based program." 
Are we truly going to continue to allow Our children to be reduced to Human Cagital 
used as Cogs in the Global Labor Market? 
Furthermore, he added his plan would change the mission of schools “from teaching 
children academic basics and knowledge to training them to serve the global 
economy in jobs selected by workforce boards.” 
Folks, we’ve heard it exact sentiment from our own Commissioner of Education, 
“Academics will have to take a back seat to all these other things.” Parents don’t like this 
idea. 
This bill therefore proposes opening up communication between schools and parents by 
developing policies that promote open, honest and transparent interactions, for the best 
outcome of our children. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
1 The Marc Tucker "Dear Hillary" Letter (thecrucialvoicecoml
