James Cleary
South Berwick
LD 1643
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1643.
I am a lifelong Maine resident with three children in the public school system. I have 
found my own public school education (in the early ‘90’s) to serve me well. I believe 
that public school can provide a solid foundation of early learning to help all Maine 
students prepare for the challenges of Higher Learning and/or adulthood in general.
It has recently been an issue of national attention that public schools have been 
promoting ideologies that many Americans disagree with. Everyone agrees that kids 
should be taught the basics of reading, writing, math, history, etc. Many Americans, 
like myself, consider that when teachers start promoting ideologies that run contrary 
to the values of parents, they are crossing a line of public trust.
As an example, we want our children to be taught the true history and horrors of 
slavery and historical racism. We want our children to be taught about the great 
triumph in American history where we have largely overcome racism and where we 
have abolished slavery. All Americans are now equal under the law. If you don't 
believe this I would challenge you to find a law (other than affirmative action) that 
disadvantages one group based on immutable characteristics. What many parents 
disagree with, myself included, is tying into history class the damaging and divisive 
ideology that racism in America is just as bad as it ever was, and that today, solely 
based on your skin color you are either permanently disadvantaged or you should bear
the responsibility of historical injustices. These are not facts, this is ideology. 
In my town a majority of our taxes go to the public school system. Placing a child in a
private school comes at great expense, on top of the great expense of paid taxes which
will then provide no direct benefit to that family. Despite the cost, many families have
been compelled to remove their children from public school in order to prevent 
indoctrination.
I would like the public school system in Maine to serve all Maine families, which is 
why I support this bill.  It will bring much needed transparency on what is going on in
schools.
Please deem LD 1643 “Ought To Pass”.
