 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org  May 10, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a 
resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I s erve  on the board of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Acad emy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today to 
express our concerns regarding LD 16 43: An Act Regarding Instr uctional Materials, 
Surveys, Analy ses, Evaluations, and Events at Public Schools .   
As an organization deeply invested in the health and well -being of children acro ss 
our sta te, we have concerns abo ut many of the bills in the current session th at 
appear to create adversarial re lationships between parents and educators .  We 
fear these efforts will increase the politicization of our school systems and make it 
more difficult to provide our youth with a first -class education.  
In this bill, we have specific concerns with section 3: Limits on surveys, analyses or 
evaluations.   This section note s that “A student may not be required, as part of 
any program administered by the department or a school admi nistrative unit, to 
submit to a survey, a nalysis or evaluation that reveals in formation concerning: ” 
and then goes on to list a number of prohibited topics.  The terms survey , analysis , 
and evaluation  are not  defined in the bill text, which  gives us pause . 
First, we worry about the impact this could have on  school safety.  For ex ample, if 
a student  made  violent threats at school, would this legislation prevent the schoo l 
from requiring the student to undergo an evaluat ion to determine if there were 
any underlying mental or psychological problems that could place other students 
at risk ?  If a stude nt was found to have a weapon in their possession , would the 
school be pre vented from asking questi ons about  illegal behavior at home?  
Additionally, we have concerns ab out the limitation  of surveys , and how that 
could potentially affect public health data collection.  While most public health  
surveys are voluntary in nature, we would want to ensure that this bill would not 
in any way impede the administration of such  surveys .  The Maine Int egrated 
Youth Health Survey  is the first to come to mind , given that  it covers substance 
use, sexual behavior, and mental  health topic s which are addressed in this bill.  
There are some bright points in this bill –notifying parents regarding the collection, 
disclosure, or use of personal information collected from students for the purpose 
of marketing, and for the schools to create policies around the co llection of 
personal information  or invasive physical examinations for instance, seem like 
appropriate standards for schools to adopt.  However, i f our concerns above 
cannot be adequately  addressed , we would ask the committee to reconsider 
passage of this bill . 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics    

