5(;}|90L 49 Commumty Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
. gglggﬁmou Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
$‘l,lBLlC EDL|C¢‘\TlON !\D‘\!C§C/\TE3 website: www'msmaweb'c0m Malm.-SchmlSuperintendents/\w ‘x.intinn 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1643 
AN ACT REGARDING INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS, SURVEYS, ANALYSES, 
EVALUATIONS AND EVENTS AT PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1643. 
The Legislative Committees of both the Maine School Superintendents Association and the Maine School 
Boards Association are opposed to L.D. 1643. Provisions to provide information to parents / guardians about 
instructional materials, surveys, analyses, evaluations and events at public schools and protections to and for 
students are currently in place through law and policy. The statute that provides this protection is 20 U.S. 
Code §l232(h), Protection of Pupil Rights. The policies that provide this protection are Policy ILD, 
Educational Research: Student Submission to Surveys, Analyses, or Evaluations; Policy JRA, Student 
Education Records and Information; and Regulation JRA-R, Student Education Records and Information 
Administrative Procedure. Policies ILD and JRA are required policies for all public schools in Maine. The 
referenced statute and the policies are attached to this testimony. 
Additionally, school and district ofﬁcials are very cautious about allowing any survey that does not provide 
direct positive data for use by their district, and not allowing the kind of surveys developed by external 
vendors. Student safety and student privacy is of paramount concern by these school ofﬁcials. 
For these reasons, this statute is redundant and not necessary. 
We hope you will follow our lead and vote ONTP on L.D. 1643. 
Steven W. Bailey Eilggn E_ King 
MSBA E*e°“ﬁ"° Di'°°'°' MSSA Executive Director
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA CODE: ILD 
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH: STUDENT SUBMISSION TO SURVEYS, 
ANALYSES, OR EVALUATIONS 
In this policy, “surveys, analyses, or evaluations ” refer to methods of gathering data for 
research purposes._ 
N0 student shall be required as part of any program wholly or partially funded by the 
U.S. Department of Education to submit to any survey, analyses, or evaluation that 
reveals information concerning: 
A. Political affiliations or beliefs of the student or the student’s parent; 
B. Mental or psychological problems of the student or the student’s family; 
C. Sex behavior or attitudes; 
D. Illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating, or demeaning behavior; 
E. Critical appraisals of other individuals with whom respondents have close 
family relationships; 
F. Legally recognized privileged or analogous relationships, such as those of 
lawyers, physicians, and ministers; 
G. Religious practices, affiliations, or beliefs of the student or student’s 
parents; or 
H. Income (other than that required by law to determine eligibility for 
participation in a program or for receiving ﬁnancial assistance under such 
program without the prior Written consent of the student’s parentl guardian, 
or of the student, if he/she is 18 years of age or older. 
All instructional materials, including teachers ’ manuals, ﬁlms, tapes, or other 
supplementary material which will be used in connection with any such survey, analysis, 
or evaluation shall be available upon request for inspection by the student’s 
parent/guardian. For the purpose of this policy, “instructional material ” does not include 
academic tests or assessments. 
A parent may inspect, upon request, a survey created by a third party before the survey is 
administered or distributed to a student. 
Page 1 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NSBA/NEPN CODE: ILD 
The Superintendent/designee will be responsible for implementing any procedures 
necessary to protect the privacy of participating students and to provide parents with 
access to surveys within a reasonable time before administration or distribution. 
The school unit will notify parents of this policy at least annually at the beginning of the 
school year and within a reasonable time of any substantive change in policy. Insofar as 
practicable,* the school unit will also directly notify parents annually at the beginning of 
the school year when surveys, analyses, or evaluations are scheduled or anticipated. 
Parents shall have the opportunity to opt their child out of participation in any survey, 
analysis, or evaluation. Students who are 18 years of age or older may opt out of such 
surveys, analyses, or evaluations. 
[NOTE: “Insofar as practicable ” acknowledges that there may be circumstances in 
which a research request is made or is approved only after the school year has 
begun. When this occurs, the school unit should notify parents far enough in 
advance for them to access surveys and related instructional materials and to opt 
their children out, if desired.] 
Legal reference: 20 U.S.C. § 1232(h) 
Cross reference: JRA—Student Educational Records and Student Information 
Adopted: 
PLEA§l'§ NOTE? MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Assocnatlon policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board's policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA CODE: IRA 
STUDENT EDUCATION RECORDS AND INFORMATION 
[School unit name] shall comply with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(“FERPA”) and all other federal and state laws and regulations concerning conﬁdentiality 
and maintenance of student records and student information. 
A. Directory Information 
[School unit name] designates the following student information as directory 
information: name, participation and grade level of students in recognized 
activities and sports, height and weight of student athletes, dates of attendance in 
the school unit, and honors and awards received. [School unit name] may 
disclose directory information if it has provided notice to parents (and eligible 
students over 18) and has not received timely written notice refusing permission to 
designate such information as directory information. 
B. Military Recruiters/Higher Education Access to Information 
Under federal law, military recruiters and institutions of higher education are 
entitled to receive the names, addresses and telephone numbers of secondary 
students and [School unit name] must comply with any such request, provided 
that parents have been notified of their right to request that this information not be 
released without their prior written consent. 
C. Information on the Intemet 
Under Maine law, [School unit name] shall not publish on the Internet any 
information that identiﬁes a student, including but not limited to the student’s full 
name, photograph, personal biography, e-mail address, home address, date of 
birth, social security number and parents’ names, without written parental consent. 
D. Transfer of Student Records 
As required by Maine law, [School unit name] sends student education records to 
a school unit to which a student applies for transfer, including disciplinary records, 
attendance records, special education records and health records (except for 
conﬁdential health records for which consent for dissemination has not been 
obtained). 
Page l of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
. 
NEPN/N SBA Code: JRA 
Designation of Law Enforcement Unit » 
School units may disclose student education records without parental consent to 
personnel of its law enforcement unit, provided that they have been designated as 
school officials with legitimate educational interests for the purpose of compliance 
with F ERPA. 
The Board hereby designates [choose one of the following options: it’s School 
Resource Ofﬁcer(s) [OR Police Department OR | as 
[School unit name] ’s law enforcement unit for the purpose of disclosure of student 
education records under FERPA. 
Health or Safety Emergency Emergencies 
As permitted by FERPA, the school unit may disclose personally identiﬁable 
information from a student’s educational record to appropriate parties, including 
parents of an eligible student, if taking into account the totality of the 
circumstances, it determines that there is an articulable and signiﬁcant threat to the 
health or safety of the student or other individuals and that knowledge of the 
infonnation is necessary to protect the health or safety of the student or other 
individuals. In the event of disclosure, the school unit will record the articulable 
and signiﬁcant threat that fonned the basis for the disclosure and the parties to 
whom the school unit has disclosed and maintain such record with the student’s 
educational record. 
Administrative Procedures and Notices 
The Superintendent is responsible for developing and implementing any 
administrative procedures and parent notices necessary to comply with the 
applicable laws and regulations concerning student education records and 
information. Notices shall be distributed annually to parents and eligible students 
concerning their rights under these laws and regulations. A copy of this policy 
shall be posted in each school. 
Legal Reference: 20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 C.F.R. Part 99 
20 U.S.C. § 7908 
20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 6001, 6001-B 
Ch. 101, 125 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules) 
Page 2 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IRA 
Cross Reference: IRA-E — Annual Notice of Student Education Records and 
Information Rights 
IRA-R — Education Records and Information Administrative 
Procedure . 
ILD — Student Surveys 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect ofﬁcial 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication, Sample policies should be used as a starting 
point for a board's poiicy development on speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address 
the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose 
of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not 
intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. . 
Page 3 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE* 
NEPN/N SBA CODE: IRA-R 
STUDENT EDUCATION RECORDS AND INFORMATION 
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 
This administrative procedure is intended to assist administrators and school staff in
. 
complying with the requirements of federal and state statutes and regulations concerning 
student education records and information, including special education requirements. 
A. Deﬁnitions 
The following deﬁnitions apply to terms used in this procedure. 
l. “Act” means the federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (20 
U.S.C. §1232g). 
2. “Directory information ” means the following information contained in an 
education record of a student: name, participation and grade level of 
students in ofﬁcially recognized activities and sports, height and weight of 
student athletes, dates of attendance in the school unit, and honors and 
awards received. 
3. “Eligible student” means a student who has attained 18 years of age who 
has not been judged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be so severely 
impaired that the student is unable to make decisions or exercise judgment 
on his/her own behalf. When a student attains the age of 18, all rights 
accorded to parents concerning education records transfer to the eligible 
student. 
4. “Parent” means parent, regardless of divorce or separation, a legal guardian, 
or individual acting as a parent or guardian provided that there shall bea 
presumption that a parent has the authority to exercise the rights governing 
such matters as divorce, separation or custody or a legally binding 
instrument that speciﬁcally revokes such rights. 
5. “Education Record” means information or data that directly relates toa 
student and is maintained by the school unit in any medium, including but 
not limited to handwriting, print, computer media, video or audio tape, 
microﬁlm and microﬁche. Records of instructional, supervisory and 
administrative personnel and personnel who support these individuals, 
Page 1 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R 
which are in the sole possession of the maker thereof and which are not 
accessible or revealed to any other person except a temporary substitute for 
the person who made the record are excluded from this deﬁnition. 
6. “Student” includes any individual with respect to whom the school unit 
maintains education records. 
Notiﬁcation 
Parents and eligible students shall be provided with notice of their rights under 
FERPA and other applicable federal and state laws and regulations concerning 
education records at the beginning of each school year or upon enrollment ifa 
student enrolls after the start of the school year. [School unit name] may provide 
notice through any of the following means: 
1. Mailing to students ’ homes; 
2. Distribution to students to take home; 
3. Publication in student handbooks; and 
4. Publication in newsletters or other materials distributed to each parent/ 
eligible student. 
Access to Policy and Administrative Procedures 
|School unit name|’s policy on Student Education Records and Student 
Information shall be posted in each school. In addition, school administrators 
shall provide copies of this administrative procedure to parents/eligible students 
upon request. 
Inspection and Review of Education Records 
Parents/eligible students may review and inspect their educational records by the 
following procedure: 
1. The parent/eligible student must make a written request to the 
Superintendent or building administrator to review the records. 
2. The Superintendent or building administrator will comply with the request 
without unnecessary delay and in a reasonable period of time, 
Page 2 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JRA-R 
but in no case more than 45 days after it received the request, and will 
comply before any IEP Team meeting regarding an Individualized 
Education Program or any due process hearing relating to the identiﬁcation, 
evaluation, or placement of the student. 
3. The Superintendent or building administrator may deny a request for access 
to or copies of the student's education records if there is reasonable doubt as 
to the legality of the parent-child relationship. Access will be withheld until 
a determination of legal right to access can be established. 
Parents/eligible students may also request to review the following: 
1. |School unit name|’s list of types and locations of all records and titles of 
officials responsible for the records; and 
2. |School unit name]’s record of disclosures of personally identifiable 
information (see following section). 
Requests to Amend Education Records 
Parents/eligible students may ask [School unit name| to amend education records 
they believe are inaccurate, misleading or in violation of the student’s privacy 
rights as follows: 
1. The parent/eligible student must make a written request to the 
Superintendent or building administrator to amend the education record. 
The request must clearly identify the part of the record they want changed, 
and specify why it is inaccurate or misleading. 
2. The Superintendent or building administrator shall, within a reasonable 
period of time after receipt of the request, either amend the record in 
accordance with the request or inform the parent/eligible student of its 
refusal to amend the record and inform the parent/eligible student of their 
right to request a hearing. 
3. If the parent/eligible student requests a hearing, it shall be held withina 
reasonable period of time from [School unit name|’s receipt of the written 
request. The parent/eligible student shall be given advance notice of the 
date, place, and time of the hearing. The Superintendent shall designate an 
individual to conduct the hearing. This individual may be an employee of 
|School unit name] so long as he/she does not have a direct interest 
Page 3 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R 
in the outcome of the hearing. The parent/eligible student shall be afforded 
a full and fair opportunity to present evidence relevant to the issues raised 
and may be assisted or represented by individuals of his/her choice at 
his/her own expense, including an attorney. 
4. ]Scho0l unit name] shall make its decision in writing within a reasonable 
period of time. The decision of the school shall include a summary of the 
evidence and the reasons for the decision. 
5. If, as a result of the hearing, ]Scho0l unit name] decides that the 
information is inaccurate, misleading or otherwise in violation of the 
privacy rights of the student, it shall amend the education records of the 
student accordingly and so inform the parent/eligible student in Writing. 
6. If, as a result of the hearing, [School unit name] decides that the 
information is not inaccurate, misleading or otherwise in violation of the 
privacy rights of the student, it shall inform the parent/eligible student of 
their right to include a statement in the student’s education record about the 
contested information and/or setting forth any reasons for disagreeing with 
the decision of ]Scho0l unit name]. 
7. Any statement placed in the student’s education record under the preceding 
paragraph shall be maintained as long as the record or contested portion is 
maintained by ]Scho0l unit name]. If the education records of the student 
or the contested portion is disclosed by the School Department to any party, 
the explanation shall also be disclosed. 
Disclosure of Education Records 
All disclosures of education records will be made in compliance with federal and 
state statutes and regulations. The School Department will maintain a record of 
disclosures of personally identiﬁable information from the education records ofa 
student. Such records do not include disclosures to the parents/eligible student, 
disclosures made pursuant to written consent of the parents/eligible student, 
disclosures to school officials or disclosures of directory information. The School 
Department will not disclose any personally identiﬁable information from the 
education records of a student without the prior written consent of the 
parent/eligible student. The written consent shall include a speciﬁcation of the 
records that may be disclosed, the purpose(s) of the disclosure(s), and the identity 
of the party or parties to whom the disclosure(s) may be made. 
Page 4 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R 
There are several exceptions to the requirement to obtain prior written consent 
before disclosing education records as follows: 
Directory Information. ]School unit name] may make directory 
information (as described in the Deﬁnitions section) public at its discretion 
unless a parent/eligible student has notified the Superintendent in writing 
by September 15"‘ [or other date designated by the school unit] or within 
thirty (30) days of enrollment, whichever is later. . 
]Sch00l unit name] may disclose directory information about former 
students without the consent of the parent/eligible student. 
Military Recruiters/Institutions of Higher Education. Military 
recruiters and institutions of higher education are entitled to receive the 
names, addresses and telephone numbers of secondary students and ]Scho0l 
unit name] must comply with any such request, provided that parents have 
been notiﬁed of their right to request that this information not be released 
without their prior written consent. Parents/eligible students who do not 
want ]School unit name] to disclose this information must notify the 
Superintendent in writing by September 15"‘ [or other date designated by 
the school unit] or within thirty (30) days of enrollment, whichever is later. 
School Officials with Legitimate Educational Interests. Education 
records may be disclosed to school officials with a “legitimate educational 
interest. ” A school official has a legitimate educational interest if he/she 
needs to review an education record in order to fulﬁll his/her professional 
responsibility. School officials include persons employed by ]Scho0l unit 
name] as an administrator, supervisor, instructor, or support staff member 
(including health or medical staff and the school unit’s designated law 
enforcement unit p6I‘SO11I1€l, if any); members of the Board of Education; 
persons or companies with whom ]School unit name] has contracted to 
provide speciﬁc services (such as attorneys, auditors, medical consultants, 
evaluators or therapists); and parents, students or volunteers serving on an 
official committee (such as a disciplinary or grievance committee) or 
assisting a school ofﬁcial in performing his/her professional 
responsibilities. 
Other School Units. Under Maine law (20-A M.R.S.A. § 6001-B), ]Sch0ol 
] is required to send a student’s education records to a school 
unit to which a student applies for transfer, including disciplinary records, 
Page 5 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION 
NEPN/N SBA Code: JRA-R 
attendance records, special education records and health records. Consent 
is not required for the transfer of these records, except for conﬁdential 
health records. 
At the request of the Superintendent of the school unit where a student 
seeks admission, the student's current or former school administrators shall 
provide, in a timely fashion, an oral or written report to the Superintendent 
indicating whether the student has been expelled or suspended or is the 
subject of an expulsion or suspension proceeding.' 
5. Other Entities/Individuals. Education records may be disclosed to other 
governmental entities, agencies and individuals as speciﬁcally permitted by 
FERPA and the accompanying regulations. 
6. Information on the Internet. Under Maine law (20-A M.R.S.A. § 6001), 
the School Department shall not publish on the Internet any information 
that identiﬁes a student, including but not limited the student’s full name, 
photograph, personal biography, e-mail address, home address, date of 
birth, social security number and parents’ names, without written parental 
consent. 
Waiver of Conﬁdentiality Rights 
A parent/eligible student may waive any of his/her rights regarding conﬁdentiality 
of educational records, but any such a waiver must be in writing and signed by the 
parent/eligible student. The school may not require that a parent/eligible student 
Waive his or her rights. Any waiver may be revoked with respect to actions 
occurring after the revocation. If a parent executes a waiver, that waiver may be 
revoked by the student any time after he/she becomes an eligible student. 
Fees for Copying Records 
There shall be no charge to search for or retrieve education records of a student. 
|Sch00l unit name] shall provide copies of education records to parents/eligible 
students upon request. The cost of producing copies of the record to 
parents/eligible student will be per page copied, plus postage. 
Parents/eligible students who are unable to pay such fees will not be denied access 
to education records. This fee, however, will not prohibit a parent's or eligible 
student's opportunity for access to the records if they are unable to pay for such 
copies. There will be no charge to search for or to retrieve the education records 
of a student. 
Page 6 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JRA-R 
Maintenance and Destruction of Education Records 
|School unit name] shall maintain accurate and up-to-date education records as 
required by federal and state statutes and regulations. 
1. Records shall be maintained by personnel who are knowledgeable about the 
applicable confidentiality. All records shall be safeguarded from 
unauthorized access. Student records must be kept in ﬁreproof storage at 
the school or a duplicate set kept off-site. 
2. The high school transcripts of all former students shall be kept in perpetuity 
by |School unit name|. A permanent record of a special education 
student’s name, address, phone number, grades, attendance record, classes 
attended, and grade and year completed shall be maintained without time 
limitations. All other records will be maintained in accordance with Maine 
State Rules for Disposition of Local Governmental Records (Schedule L). 
3. [School unit name] shall not destroy any education record if there is any 
outstanding request to inspect or review such records. 
4. Records of access to education records shall be retained as long as the 
records themselves. 
5. [School unit namel shall inform parents of students with disabilities when 
education records are no longer needed to provide educational services to 
the student or to demonstrate that the school has provided the student witha 
free appropriate public education as required by law. At that point, the 
records may be turned over to parents/eligible student upon their request, or 
destroyed in accordance with the parent’s request or school unit procedures. 
Complaints 
The United States Department of Education maintains an ofﬁce that handles 
complaints about alleged violations of FERPA by local school units. Complaints 
regarding violations of rights accorded parents/eligible students may be submitted 
in writing to: 
Family Policy Compliance Ofﬁce 
Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20202 
Page 7 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R 
Legal Reference: 20 U.S.C. § l232g; 34 C.F.R. Part 99 
20 U.S.C. § 7908 
20-A M.R.S.A. § 6001, 6001-B 
Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules, Ch. I01, 125 
Maine State Archives, Rules for Disposition of Local 
Governmental Records (Schedule L) 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect official Association 
policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point fora 
board's policy development on speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns 
and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and 
a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not 
intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own leqal counsel. 
Page 8 of8 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
Lll > U.S. Code > Title 20 > CHAPTER 31 > SUBCHAPTER lll > Part4 > §1232h 
Quick search by citation: 
Title 
enter title 
Section 
section 
20 U.S. Code § i232h - Protection of pupil rights 
U.S. Code Notes
| 
(a) |NSPECTION o|= INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS BY PARENTS on GUARDIANS 
All instructional materials, including teacher's manuals, films, tapes, or other 
supplementary material which will be used in connection with any survey, analysis, 
or evaluation as part of any applicable program shall be available for inspection by 
the parents or guardians of the children. 
(b) LIMITS ow suavev, ANALYSIS, on EVALUATIONS 
No student shall be required, as part of any applicable program, to submit toa 
survey, analysis, or evaluation that reveals information concerning — 
(1) political affiliations or beliefs of the student or the student's parent; 
(2) mental or psychological problems of the student or the student's family; 
(3) sex behavior or attitudes; 
(4) illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating, or demeaning behavior; 
(5) critical appraisals of other individuals with whom respondents have close 
family relationships; 
(6) legally recognized privileged or analogous relationships, such as those of 
lawyers, physicians, and ministers; 
(7) religious practices, affiliations, or beliefs of the student or student's parent; 
or 
(8) income (other than that required by law to determine eligibility for 
participation in a program or for receiving financial assistance under such 
program), 
without the prior consent of the student (if the student is an adult or 
emancipated minor), or in the case ofan unemancipated minor, without the 
prior written consent of the parent. 
(C) DEVELOPMENT OF LOCAL POLICIES CONCERNING STUDENT PRIVACY, PARENTAL ACCESS TO INFORMATION, 
AND ADMINISTRATION OF CERTAIN PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS TO MINORS 
(1) DEVELOPMENT AND ADOPTION or LOCAL POLICIES 
Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b), a local educational agency 
that receives funds under any applicable program shall develop and adopt 
policies, in consultation with parents, regarding the following: 
(A) 
(i) The right of a parent of a student to inspect, upon the request of the 
parent, a survey created by a third party before the survey is 
administered or distributed by a school to a student; and 
(ii) any applicable procedures for granting a request by a parent for 
reasonable access to such survey within a reasonable period of time 
after the request is received. 
(B) Arrangements to protect student privacy that are provided by the agency 
in the event of the administration or distribution of a sun/ey to a student 
containing one or more of the following items (including the right ofa
parent ofa student to inspect, upon the request of the parent, any survey 
containing one or more of such items): 
(i) Political affiliations or beliefs of the student or the student's parent. 
(ii) Mental or psychological problems of the student or the student's 
family. 
(iii) Sex behavior or attitudes. 
(iv) Illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating, or demeaning behavior. 
(v) Critical appraisals of other individuals with whom respondents have 
close family relationships. 
(vi) Legally recognized privileged or analogous relationships, such as 
those of lawyers, physicians, and ministers. 
(vii) Religious practices, affiliations, or beliefs of the student or the 
student's parent. 
(viii) income (other than that required by law to determine eligibility for 
participation in a program or for receiving financial assistance under 
such program). 
(C) 
(i) The right of a parent of a student to inspect, upon the request ofthe 
parent, any instructional material used as part of the educational 
curriculum for the student; and 
(ii) any applicable procedures for granting a request by a parent for 
reasonable access to instructional material within a reasonable period of 
time after the request is received. 
(D) The administration of physical examinations or screenings that the 
school or agency may administer to a student. 
(E) The collection, disclosure, or use of personal information collected from 
students for the purpose of marketing or for selling that information (or 
otherwise providing that information to others for that purpose), including 
arrangements to protect student privacy that are provided by the agency in 
the event of such collection, disclosure, or use. 
(F)
(i) The right of a parent of a student to inspect, upon the request of the 
parent, any instrument used in the collection of personal information 
under subparagraph (E) before the instrument is administered or 
distributed to a student; and 
(ii) any applicable procedures for granting a request by a parent for 
reasonable access to such instrument within a reasonable period of time 
after the request is received.- 
(2) PARENTAL NOTIFICATION 
(A) Notification of policies 
The policies developed by a local educational agency under paragraph 
(1) shall provide for reasonable notice of the adoption or continued use 
of such policies directly to the parents of students enrolled in schools 
sen/ed by that agency. At a minimum, the agency shall-— 
(i) provide such notice at least annually, at the beginning of the school 
year, and within a reasonable period of time after any substantive 
change in such policies; and 
(ii) offer an opportunity for the parent (and for purposes of an activity 
described in subparagraph (C)(i), in the case ofa student of an_ 
appropriate age, the student) to opt the student out of participation in 
an activity described in subparagraph (C). 
(B) Notification of specific events 
The local educational agency shall directly notify the parent of a student, at 
least annually at the beginning of the school year, of the specific or 
approximate dates during the school year when activities described in 
subparagraph (C) are scheduled, or expected to be scheduled. 
(C) Activities requiring notification 
The following activities require notification under this paragraph: 
(i) Activities involving the collection, disclosure, or use of personal 
information collected from students for the purpose of marketing or for 
selling that information (or otherwise providing that information to 
others for that purpose). 
(ii) The administration of any survey containing one or more items 
described in clauses (i) through (viii) of paragraph (1 )(B).
(iii) Any nonemergency, invasive physical examination or screening that 
is— 
(I) required as a condition of attendance; 
(ll) administered by the school and scheduled by the school in 
advance; and 
(Ill) not necessary to protect the immediate health and safety of the 
student, or of other students. 
(3) EXISTING POLICIES 
A local educational agency need not develop and adopt new policies if the State 
educational agency or local educational agency has in place, onjanuary 8,2002, 
policies covering the requirements of paragraph (1). The agency shall provide 
reasonable notice of such existing policies to parents and guardians of 
students, in accordance with paragraph (2). . 
(4) EXCEPTIONS 
(A) Educational products or services 
Paragraph (1)(E) does not apply to the collection, disclosure, or use of 
personal information collected from students for the exclusive purpose 
of developing, evaluating, or providing educational products or services 
for, or to, students or educational institutions, such as the following: 
(i) College or other postsecondary education recruitment, or military 
recruitment. 
(ii) Book clubs, magazines, and programs providing access to low-cost 
literary products. 
(iii) Curriculum and instructional materials used by elementary schools 
and secondary schools. 
(iv) Tests and assessments used by elementary schools and secondary 
schools to provide cognitive, evaluative, diagnostic, clinical, aptitude, or 
achievement information about students (or to generate other 
statistically useful data for the purpose of securing such tests and 
assessments) and the subsequent analysis and public release of the 
aggregate data from such tests and assessments.
(v) The sale by students of products or services to raise funds for school- 
related or education-related activities. g 
(vi) Student recognition programs. 
(B) State law exception 
The provisions of this subsection — 
(i) shall not be construed to preempt applicable provisions of State law 
that require parental notification; and 
(ii) do not apply to any physical examination or screening that is 
permitted or required by an applicable State law, including physical 
examinations or screenings that are permitted without parental 
notification. 
(5) GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(A) Rules of construction 
(i) This section does not supersede section 1232g of this title. 
(ii) Paragraph (1)(D) does not apply to a survey administered toa 
student in accordance with the individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.). 
(B) Student rights 
The rights provided to parents under this section transfer to the student 
when the student turns 18 years old, or is an emancipated minor (under an 
applicable State law) at any age. 
(C) information activities 
The Secretary shall annually inform each State educational agency and each 
local educational agency of the educational agencys obligations under this 
section and section 1232g of this title. 
(D) Funding 
A State educational agency or local educational agency may use funds 
provided under part A of title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act of 1965 [20 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.] to enhance parental involvement in 
areas affecting the in-school privacy of students.
(6) DEFINITIONS 
As used in this subsection: 
(A) Instructional material 
The term "instructional material" means instructional content that is 
provided to a student, regardless of its format, including printed or 
representational materials, audio-visual materials, and materials in 
electronic or digital formats (such as materials accessible through the 
Internet). The term does not include academic tests or academic 
assessments. 
(B) Invasive physical examination 
The term "invasive physical examination" means any medical examination 
that involves the exposure of private body parts, or any act during such 
examination that includes incision, insertion, or injection into the body, but 
does not include a hearing, vision, or scoliosis screening. 
(C) Local educational agency 
The term "local educational agency" means an elementary school, secondary 
school, school district, or local board of education that is the recipient of 
funds under an applicable program, but does not include a postsecondary 
institution. 
(D) Parent 
The term "parent" includes a legal guardian or other person standing in loco 
parentis (such as a grandparent or stepparent with whom the child lives, or 
a person who is legally responsible for the welfare of the child). 
(E) Personal information 
The term "personal information" means individually identifiable 
information including- — 
(i) a student or parent's first and last name; 
(ii) a home or other physical address (including street name and the 
name of the city or town); 
(iii) a telephone number; or 
(iv) a Social Security identification number. 
(F) Student
The term “student” means any elementary school or secondary school 
student. 
(G) Survey 
The term "survey" includes an evaluation. 
(d) NOTICE 
Educational agencies and institutions shall give parents and students effective 
notice of their rights under this section. 
(e) ENFORCEMENT 
The Secretary shall take such action as the Secretary determines appropriate 
to enforce this section, except that action to terminate assistance provided 
under an applicable program shall be taken only if the Secretary determines 
that— 
(1) there has been a failure to comply with such section; and 
(2) compliance with such section cannot be secured by voluntary means. 
(f) OFFICE AND REVIEW so/mo 
The Secretary shall establish or designate an office and review board within the 
Department of Education to investigate, process, review, and adjudicate violations 
of the rights established under this section. 
(Pub. L. 90-247, title IV, § 445, formerly § 439, as added Pub. L. 93-380, title V, § 514(a), 
Aug. 21, 1974, 88 Stat. 574; amended Pub. L. 95-561, title Xll, § 1250, Nov. 1, 1978,% Stat. 2355; Pub. L. 103-227, title X, § 1017, Mar. 31, 1994, 108 Stat. 268; renumbered 
§445, Pub. L. 103-382, title ll, §212(b)(1), Oct. 20, 1994, 108 Stat. 3913; amended Pub. L. 
107-110, title X, §1061,Jan. 8,2002, 115 Stat. 2083; Pub. L. 114-95, title IX, §9215(mm) 
(5), Dec. 10,2015, 129 Stat. 2176.)
