APTA 
x AChapter of the American 
Physical Thera py Association 
Testimony in Support of LD 1085 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HCIFS Committee: 
My name is Gwen Simons. lam the lobbyist for the Maine Chapter of the American Physical Therapy 
Association. lam a physical therapist myself and a healthcare lawyer in Scarborough. The Maine APTA 
represents over 2500 physical therapists (PTs) and physical therapist assistants (PTAs) in Maine. 
We are testifying in support of LD 1085, An Act To Increase Transparency of and Lower Health Care 
Costs. Specifically, we support renewing this law for the provision that allows a consumer to use their 
benefits when seeking care from an out of network provider whose fees are less than the statewide 
average for the same covered healthcare sen/ice. 
When this bill was first introduced in 2017, the carriers testified that this provision would encourage 
their in-network providers to go out of network. That hasn't happened. 
However, there has been tremendous growth in the number of new physical therapy practices that are 
staying out of network entirely. I personally know of about 17 PTs in Maine who have started out of 
network practices in the last 3-4 years. Most of these therapists are specialists in a niche area of 
practice. They stay out of network because in-network reimbursement is inadequate and the 
administrative burdens that you heard in-network providers testify about in LD 1383 last week are too 
high and interfere with their ability to provide quality care. These out-of-network providers ’ fees are 
still far below the in-network hospital rates and statewide averages. With insurance premiums being so 
high, consumers should be able to access these highly qualified, low-cost providers. 
If you decide to renew this law, you should strike the requirement for the out-of-network provider to be 
a Mainecare provider for a non-MaineCare patient to access this law. Out-of-network providers are not 
likely to be MaineCare providers, so leaving this requirement in the law is unfair to consumers who pay 
for their insurance and makes the law useless. 
We also support the provision to extend the applicability of the law to HMO and HSA compatible plans. 
These plans pay a fee for service for in-network physical therapy services, so there is no logical reason to 
exclude consumers who have these plans from being able to access lower cost out-of-network 
providers. 
Thank you for your careful consideration of this bill. Please feel free to contact me if you have any 
questions or need more information at gwen@si,:13_o_p_gg3g*:g_>wcjga;,t§,§},§g;rv.com, or 207-883-7225.
