i‘ Allumbaugh » .*i . 
April 18, 2023 
From: Joel Allumbaugh 
President, The Allumbaugh Agency 
Visiting Fellow, 
The Foundation for Government Accountability 
RE: L.D. 1085 
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial 
Services: 
I come before you today in support of L.D. 1085, An Act to Increase Transparency of & Lower Health Care Costs. 
l would like to take this opportunity to introduce The Allumbaugh Agency. We are a full-service employee benefit 
agency specializing in the design and administration of employee benefit plans. Our customers are Maine small 
businesses and their employees. I am also a Visiting Fellow with the Foundation for Government Accountability, 
a non-partisan, non-profit organization that strives to improve health care policy in the states and Washington, 
D.C. 
This bill builds upon Public Law 232 passed by the Maine Legislature in 2017 by broadening the health care 
incentive program to apply to all small group health plans, notjust Health Savings Account compatible health 
plans. lt also creates a minimum shared savings threshold to ensure patients are adequately incentivized to 
shop for lower cost, higher value care. lt adds surgical procedures to the list of services included in incentive 
programs and eliminates the automatic repeal date. The bill also strikes the exclusion of HMO’s and 
requirement for providers to participate in Medicare and Mainecare in order for consumers to receive 
protections when seeking lower cost care at out—of~network providers. 
Health care costs continue to rise, and this is an opportunity to increase downward pressure on costs. 
Insurers Should be Held to Minimum Standards for their incentive programs. Medical costs vary widely. 
Anthem’s incentive program illustrates a cost difference of over $3,000 for an MRI of the knee and over $3,500 
for a colonoscopy. Harvard Pilgrim illustrates a potential savings for a routine lab test of over $800. 
Insurer incentive programs, however, may provide very little incentive for consumers to shop. Community 
Health Options, for example, offers an opportunity to earn a $5 gift card once annually for shopping labs, 
radiology and inraging services. 
Some insures are simply meeting the minimum requirements under the law so they can point to poor results 
and advocate for the repeal of this provision. This is a huge disservice to consumers who are radically 
overpaying for health care services and could save significantly with even modest effort from their insurer.
‘ Allumpaugh T 
lY 
V 
t l 
Part of establishing minimum standards should be inclusion of surgery as a service category. Non~emergency 
surgeries have significant cost variation. The Compare |\/laine website shows cost variation for removal of tonsils 
of $3,618 to $15,201 just within a 25-mile radius. This is exactly the type of service we should incentivize 
patients to shop for. 
Insurers argued that surgery was too complicated to include in these programs, yet Anthem's current small 
group incentive program "Vitals Smart Shopper” already includes surgical procedures. This should be included 
in all insurer programs. 
Patients should also have access to lower cost care regardless of their type of insurance plan. We should not 
restrict patients from accessing lower cost care because their health insurance plan is an HMO. insurers selling 
HMO’s should bear the burden of negotiating lower provider costs on behalf of consumers so there is no reason 
to seek care out of network. 
HlVlOs argued when this bill was first passed, they clid not have the systems to manage out-of-network claims, 
but this section puts the burden on the patient already to submit bills on a form provided by the insurers, so the 
process has already been determined and is not automated through any insurers claim processing systems. 
We should never force patients to seek lower value, higher cost care. 4318-B ensures patients will not be 
penalized with increased out-of-pocket costs when they seek higher value, lower cost care from non-network 
providers. If insurers want patients to remain in-network, they should negotiate lower costs for consumers and 
if they are unable to do so, patients should have the freedom to take advantage of higher value, lower cost care 
when they find it. A provider' s orientation with Medicare and Medicaid is not a reason to limit patient access. 
Transparency of health care costs should not be temporary. Transparency and incentives to seek high value, 
lower cost care is about creating habits among consumers which takes time. It is also about encouraging 
providers to react to consumer demand for affordability in health care. Sending a signal that these efforts only 
need to be maintained for a temporary period is the wrong message. Progress needs to be built upon not 
discarded. 
Thank you for your consideration. I urge you to build upon l\/laine ’s important steps to improve transparency 
and access to lower cost health care for Maine consumers and vote ought to pass on LD 1085. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Joel Allumbaugh 
President, The Allumbaugh Agency 
Visiting Fellow, The Foundation for Government Accountability
