q HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
;g,;,S»~? ‘ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION ‘ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 / -._-/ -1 
7 
TTY: (207) 237-4469 
Joshua Morris 
P.O. Box 246 
North Turner, ME 04266 
Phone: (207) 754-7829 
Joshua Morris@legislature.maine. gov 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, distinguished fellow members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is 
Joshua Morris, and I represent the people of Tumer, Leeds, and Wayne. I am here today 
to present LD 1085, An Act to Increase Transparency of and Lower Healthcare Costs. 
This bill builds on the right to shop legislation that was passed in 2017. The most 
important thing this bill proposes to do is make the law permanent by eliminating the 
repeal set for January 1, 2024. Right to shop is good policy, by leaving in the repeal it 
disincentivizes insurance companies from offering a comprehensive beneﬁt. They can 
wait until it goes away. 
The next most important thing this bill does is extends the right to shop to surgical 
procedures. This provision makes sense because there is a wide range of costs for 
surgical procedures. If consumers can ﬁnd a high quality, lower cost procedure out of 
network they should be allowed to shop for it. 
The bill also requires that insurers offer more savings to their members. The idea 
behind this is that consumers should be able to shop for services that offer a real beneﬁt 
and savings to them. lt would require that they offer competitive procedures that offer 
better savings. 
This provision is important because one of the issues you will hear about from 
opponents is that right to shop is not widely used. One insurance company only offersa 
$10 gift card to “incentivize ” shopping. If we require more savings be passed onto 
consumers, it is more likely people will shop for these services. 
The bill also extends the right to shop to more health plans requiring that it be 
offered by HMOs as well. Regardless of where they get your health insurance, consumers 
should have the beneﬁt of getting lower prices. 
District 91 Leeds, Turner & Wayne
I worked with Joel Allumbaugh in developing this legislation. He is here today 
and can answer some of the more technical aspects of the legislation as well as the history 
of this issue. I thank you for your consideration and will be happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
District 91 Leeds, Tumer & Wayne
