Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Honorable members ofthe State of Maine Joint Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Dwayne Morin and I have been the Town Manager of North 
Berwick for the past 26 years. I am testifying in support of LD 232 ”An Act to Amend the Laws Governing 
Bonding Restrictions for School Administrative Units." The Town of North Berwick thanks Representative 
Roberts for sponsoring and Senator Rafferty and Representative Lavigne for cosponsoring this important 
piece of legislation. 
This bill simply stated allows School Administrative Districts to bond school improvement projects fora 
period not to exceed 30 years thereby providing Districts with a tool in the development of budgets and 
the funding of school construction projects. Over the past few years, the cost of construction has 
increased significantly and the ability to spread the payments of school construction projects over a period 
of 30 years would assist the school districts as they plan for school construction projects and the yearly 
property tax impact upon the taxpayers of the district. Currently Municipalities can bond projects for 30 
years, however, school districts are not afforded this opportunity. This bill is not a mandate to borrow for 
30 years but provides a school district with the ability to do so if they, as a district, feel this would be in 
the best interest of the district. Again, simply providing another tool in the financial and budgetary 
toolbox of school districts as they seek to make necessary school improvements. 
This bill was the result of a proposed school construction project in the RSU60 school district. The district 
is in need of completing school construction projects on 3 of the elementary schools within the district; 
Lebanon Elementary, North Berwick Elementary and Hussey School in Berwick due to crowding issues. 
These projects did not receive the State of Maine rating necessary to receive assistance from the State of 
Maine School Construction Fund and the total cost ofthe projects has to be borne by the local taxpayers 
of the district. The estimated cost of these projects was $57,282,900.00 and due to the borrowing 
limitations (the district chose a 20-year period not knowing that non state funding project could use a 25 
year term), the impact on local taxpayers was estimated to increase taxes 14.5% or in the case of North 
Berwick taxpayers, an average increase of $473.82 per year. If the district had the ability to spread their 
payment over a 30-year period, the impact to taxpayers would have been decreased significantly. In the 
end, the school construction projects were rejected by voters for various reasons but primarily due to the 
significant tax impact to the 3 communities comprising RSU60. Even though rejected by voters, residents 
of the district recognize the need for these projects, albeit, some would like the projects spread out 
instead of completing them all at once. Just because the voters rejected the projects, does not mean that 
the need for the improvements has diminished. An alternate school construction project plan that hasa 
lesser financial impact on the communities may be more acceptable to voters and increasing the bonding 
term would play an important part ofthe financial impact on the individual taxpayer to fund the projects. 
Like a typical Mainer contemplating a new home purchase or an improvement on their home, total project 
cost is a factor, however, so is the ability to borrow funds toward that project to make the project a reality 
and fit within their family budget. That is why most homeowners choose a 30-year mortgage when 
purchasing or building a home. This bill would afford school districts with that same ability, to spread the 
cost of their school construction project over a 30-year period decreasing the impact on local taxpayers 
on a yearly basis. 
Thank you for the ability to testify in favor of l.D 232 and I would welcome any questions from the 
committee. I would make myself available for any workshop on the bill should the committee seek 
additional input into this important piece of legislation.
