UV» ZY$?§$22.2i; 
The Maine Cloaliticm Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Bemastic Viralenrze 207_43o_8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In SUPPORT of LD 765: "An Act to Permit Recordings of a Protected Person to Be 
Admissible in Evidence ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Wednesday, March 15, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ in support of LD 765, “An Act to Permit Recordings ofa Protected Person 
to Be Admissible in Evidence. ” In particular, we urge you to support Section 5 of this 
proposal, which outlines a process through which the family courts will have discretion to 
allow parties and Title 19-A guardians ad litem access to this important evidence and to have 
the ability to consider it in family court proceedings. 
Far more interviews containing disclosures of abuse take place at Child Advocacy 
Centers than prosecutions for criminal conduct associated with those disclosures. Far more 
interviews containing disclosures of abuse take place at Child Advocacy Centers than 
protective custody cases are initiated through the child welfare system based on those 
disclosures. For most children making disclosures of abuse, critically important decisions 
about their safety and wellbeing are left to Maine’s family courts. And yet they d0n’t have 
access to these interviews. it is in the best interests of children for decision makers in family 
court proceedings to have access to this important evidence about abuse experienced or 
witnessed by the children about whom these decisions are being made. 
Maine’s Child Advocacy Centers have implemented a best practice, nationally 
accredited model for interviewing abused children. This interview, conducted by a trained 
professional using non-leading questions, much closer in time to when abuse occurred than 
subsequent family court litigation, will almost always be the best evidence available to the 
court about what the child actually experienced. Access to these interviews will help Maine’s 
family courts make decisions that better respond to the experiences of children. 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 0f2 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. MCEDV and our 
member programs look forward to working with you and interested parties on these 
important issues. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 430-8334, Email: andrea@mcedv.org
