MAINE FAMILY LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Report to Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
On LD 765 
“An Act to Permit Recordings of Protected Persons to Be Admissible As Evidence ” 
Introduction 
The Maine Family Law Advisory Commission hereby reports to the Maine Legislature, 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, on LD 765 “An Act to Permit Recordings of Protected 
Person to Be Admissible as Evidence. ” For the reasons set out below, FLAC supports LD 765 
as it relates to family law cases. 
Discussion 
LD 765 does two things (1) gives access to forensic interview recordings from Children ’s 
Advocacy Centers to litigants in family court proceedings after judicial review; and (2) allows 
these interviews to be admissible as evidence in family court proceedings. Because FLAC 
believes these portions of the bill allow courts to have access to important evidence to help make 
determinations of children ’s best interest, FLAC supports this bill. FLAC submits this report 
on LD 765 only as it relates to family law cases. FLAC takes no position on the portions of 
this bill that relate to criminal cases. 
FLAC supports access to the forensic interview recordings in Children ’s Advocacy Centers 
for a variety of reasons. First, some FLAC members who have had the opportunity to review 
these interviews in other types of cases have found the recordings to be valuable, non-leading, 
thorough interviews that could be valuable evidence in evaluating a child’s best interest. Second, 
FLAC identiﬁed that these interviews could be just as valuable evidence in a family matter case 
as a child protective case. The law currently allows access in child protective cases but not- family 
law cases. Finally, FLAC supports the rigorous process for allowing access, which involves 
judicial review and a protective order, because it protects the sensitive material in the recording. It 
also mirrors the current process litigants use for accessing child protective records in a family court 
case, records which similarly contain sensitive information. 
FLAC largely supports the admissibility portion because it recognizes that minimizing a 
child needing to retell their narrative will reduce the trauma children experience if forced to testify 
in the court process. FLAC also understands that forensic interview recordings are already 
frequently being admitted in child protective proceedings, which have greater due process 
protections than family court proceedings, pursuant to a broader child hearsay exception ‘. 
Finally, FLAC members also highlight that some cases of child sexual assault may never be 
1 
Pursuant to Title 22, Section 4034, in a request for a Preliminary Protection Order, the Court 
may consider evidence, including reports and records, that would otherwise be inadmissible as 
hearsay evidence.
l
brought forward as a criminal or child protective matter for a variety of reasons, including but not 
limited to the child’s age, the child’s ability to testify in open court at a criininal proceeding, or the 
other reasons that make criminal prosecution disfavored. Nonetheless, this valuable piece of 
evidence can still be utilized to protect children and ensure their best interest is met by allowing 
them to be reviewed by the judge in the family matter case when relevant. The reviewing judge 
can then determine what weight to give the interview as part of the court’s analysis and decision 
of What is in the child’s best interests. 
FLAC does not support the inclusion of proposed §358(5) “Certiﬁcation of forensic 
interview recordings. ” Unlike business records, medical records, and bank records, forensic 
interviews are conducted for investigative purposes. In that sense, they are more akin to 
police reports than business records. FLAC’s position is that the court has an important 
gate-keeping function to serve pursuant to proposed §358(3) and proposed §358(5) side-steps 
that process. 
Conclusion 
For all these reasons, FLAC supports LD 765 as a necessary improvement to the equitable 
administration of justice for children and families in family matters.' 
Dated: M h3 2023 arc 
. Respectfully submitted: 
Maine Family Law Advisory Commission 
Hon. John Martin, District Court Judge (Chair) 
Hon. Stephen Nelson, Superior Court Justice 
Hon. Steven Chandler, Family Law Magistrate 
Hon. William Avantaggio, Probate Court J udgei 
Christopher McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW 
Timothy E. Robbins, Esq., Executive Director, Kids First Center 
Edward S. David, Esq. 
Diane E. Kenty, Esq, Maine Judicial Branch, CADRES 
Catherine Miller, Esq. 
Linsey Ruhl, Esq., Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
Debby Willis, AAG, Maine Dept. of Health and Human Services Designee
2
