 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 765 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 765, A n Act to Permit Recordings of a Protected Person to Be Admissible in Evidence  
 
DA: March 15, 2023  
 
  
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LD 765, as members are divided on the proposal .  Although CLAC 
members support the policy of protecting vulnerable persons who may be traumatized by the court 
process and applying national best practi ces to achieve these goals , CLAC members expressed 
concerns about the broad language of the bill .   The bill would  limit role of the trial court with respect 
to assessing the reliability and admissibility of evidence , in particular, prior statements of wit nesses.   
Trial court judges exercise their discretion in applying the  Rules of Evidence to such evidence; this bill 
usurps that role to the extent that it makes admissibility largely contingent upon statutorily -defined  
qualifications of the interviewer and interview circumstances.     CLAC also identified the following 
specific issues.  
 
 Section 1: Anyone under the age of 18 would automatically be a “protected person,” without 
consideration of individualized factors.  This is a broad category without regard to witness 
competency , traditionally a matter within the purview of the judge,  and unrelated to age of the witness 
as an element of any crime , including sexual assault crimes against children .     
  
 With regard to ad ult “protected persons ,” it is not clear how  the determination would be made 
as to whether a person is “eligible” for services  (for example, if a person is not already receiving 
services) and therefore protected.        
 
 Section 4:  It is not apparent why  prosecuting attorneys were stricken from this provision, while 
law enforcement agencies remain included (as having access  to the records) .   Prosecuting attorneys 
are listed separately and included in Section 5 , which addresses access to the recordings .    
 
 Section 5: In proposed § 4019 (9 -A)(D)(1), the responsible prosecuting attorney should also be 
given an opportunity to indicate its position on disclosure of the records, so that the factors identified 
in 16 M.R.S. § 804 may be identified and addressed  by the court.   The approach of proposed (9 -A)(E) 
was supported, but would be more appropriately addressed by Court rules rather than by statute.    
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It consists 
of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current defense 
attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as defense 
counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three  sitting judges and one retired 
practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, the Co -
 
 Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as consultants.  
The Supreme Judicial Cou rt’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the Court to CLAC.   
CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code  and in other Titles, 
the Bail  and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal justice processes.    
