A‘ 
a 1 PG Box 7860 
Portiand, ME 04112 
* 1 ' 
wwwnaclumaine org 
AMERIBAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Mame 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
~ 
LD 765 — Ought Not to Pass 
An Act to Permit Recordings of a Protected 
Person to Be-Admissible in Evidence 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
March 15, 2023 A 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am 
policy director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to oppose 
LD 765, legislation that would erode the Sixth Amendment rights of people charged 
with crimes.' 
If enacted, this bill would create a new exception to the hearsay rule. Under the 
hearsay rule, an out~of-court statement submitted for the truth of the matter, 
asserted is inadmissible in court against a person charged with crime. The hearsay 
rule exists to protect our constitutional right to confront witnesses against us in 
criminal prosecutions, enshrined in the Confrontation Clause of the SixthA 
Amendment to the federal constitution. . 
The Confrontation Clause is a “bedrock procedural guarantee ” that “applies to both 
federal and state prosecutions. ” Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 42 (2004) As 
the Supreme Court pointed out in Crawford v. Washington, the “primary object” of 
the Confrontation C1ause’s protection is against statements made by an accuser out 
of court to government officials, including police. Id. at 58. Such testimonial 
evidence is squarely at issue here. The fact that the government official in question 
has >82 hours of training when asking the witness to make testimonial statements, 
“is not an antidote to the confrontation problem, but rather the trigger that makes 
the Clause's demandsmost urgent.” Id. at 66. 
If this bill passed, recorded interviews of people younger than eighteen or adults 
eligiblefor protective services would be admissible in court against people in 
criminal prosecutions if, (1) those interviews were conducted by a “forensic 
interviewer, ” and (2) the protected person is available to be cross-examined.
1
A rule like this would undermine a foundational principle of fair criminal trials: 
that the burden of proving the crime and calling witnesses rests with the state, not 
on the defense. This bill would make the defense — not the state — responsible for 
calling the pre-recorded witness for cross-examination. Moreover, this would ensure 
that witnesses would essentially be allowed to testify twice in the same trial (once 
through a pre-recorded video, and again in court). 
The Confrontation Clause is a crucial protection that has been a feature of legal 
systems since Roman times. It is the best way the legal system has devised to 
confront witnesses against the accused to get at the truth and protect defendants 
from Wrongful convictions. Because LD 765 undermines this core constitutional 
protection, we ask that you vote ought not to pass.'
2
