mzggtizb tow lb Mam .2043 
KATHRYN SLATTERY 
DISTRICT I 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS 
DISTRICT II 
NEIL MCLEAN 
DISTRICT III 
MAEGHAN MALONEY 
DISTRICT IV STATE OF MAINE 
. x; '5 
$1.. ~' 
I,>"" »-/-aw * 
, 1 §T?,,*As:- 
. R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
NATASHA IRVING 
DISTRICT VI 
ROBERT GRANGER 
DISTRICT VII 
Tom) R. COLLINS 
DISTRICT VIII 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
SHIRA BURNS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
“An Act to Permit Recordings of a Protected Person to Be Admissible in Evidence ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Public Hearing Date: March l5, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 765 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Shira Burns and I represent the Maine Prosecutors Association and am here 
to testify insupport of LD 765. 
This bill came about with the leadership of Senator Carney prioritizing our children in the State of 
Maine to safeguard them against continued trauma while adhering to all of a defendant ’s 
constitutional rights. Unfortunately, but fortunately, this is not groundbreaking legislation. The 
language was actually derived from looking at statutes in many other states that protect their 
children throughout the judicial system and allow prior child statements into evidence. This bill 
doesn’t go as far as many other states that have broader statutes of admissibility of children ’s 
statements, but this is a great next step from what we already have in statute that allows for 
accommodations in court for child testimony and other statutes that directly state certain evidence is 
admissible in court. 
“One of the greatest difficulties for prosecutors of sexual assaults against children is balancing the 
defendants ’ 6* Amendment right to conﬂontation with the negative effects that testifying has on 
child victims. Requiring a child to testify in court about past sexual abuse in ﬁ'ont of a room ﬁill of 
strangers, as well as his or her abuse can be painful, frightening, and difﬁcult. Research shows that 
testifying in court is traumatizing for children, and that this trauma can diminish the quality and 
reliability of a child’s testimony? “ This proposed legislation is a balance of both. It allows for the 
admissibility of recorded forensic .interviews, which are conducted by competently-trained 
professionals who employ techniques developed through years of research as part of a larger 
investigative process that greatly aids in the discovery of crucial facts,”2 but requires the availability 
of the witness to be cross examined. Many courts throughout our country have weighed in on this 
process and all agree, if the witness is available for cross examination, the process is constitutional. 
In State v. Adams, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court said “When the declarant is available for 
cross-examination at trial, a defendant ’s Sixth Amendment right to confront the witness is not 
compromised. ”3 Our own Maine Supreme Judicial Court has weighed in on what is considered 
“available ” for confrontation clause purposes. ‘ 
‘ From on the Stand to on Tape: Why Recorded Child Victim Testimony is Safer, More Eﬁective, & Fairer, 22 UC 
Davis J .Juv. L. & P0l’y 39, Winter, 2018. 
2 Id. 
3 2019 ME 132. 
4 State v Gagne, 2017 ME 63 and State v. Adams, 2019 ME 132.
JQ 
1’’ “R 
=v 
Furthermore, when certain evidence is deemed admissible pursuant to statute,5 the Maine Supreme 
Judicial Court has already ruled how the Maine Rules of Evidence interplay with any statutory 
exception to the hearsay rule.6 This proposed legislation will provide a direct route of admissibility 
of a forensic interview into evidence, but the evidence will still be analyzed for admissibility 
through the other rules of evidence. 
This is a policy decision for our lawmakers on how to help address child sexual abuse and the 
trauma associated with it. Prosecutors around the state will make good use of this statute to hold 
offenders accountable and minimize the trauma children face in interacting with the court system. 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association is in support of LD 765. 
5 
l6 M.R.S. 356, 357, 451, 453, 454, and 15 M.R.S. § 1205 
6 
State v. Jones, 2019 ME 33.
