 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
March  15, 2023 
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative M att Moonen , Chair  
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 438   
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re:  LD 765, An Act To Permit Recordings of a Protected Person to Be Admissible in  Evidence  
 
Dear Senator C arney , Representative M oonen , and Standing Members of the 
Committee on Judiciary : 
 
My name is Staci Converse and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine 
(DRM).  DRM is Maine’s designated Protection and Advocacy Agency and our mission is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding opportunities for people  with disabilities in Maine.  I write in support  of LD 765, An 
Act To Permit Recordings of a Protected Person to Be Admissible in  Evidence .  
 This bill is of paramount importance for survivors of abuse, neglect, exploitation, and 
sexual assault who have disabilities.  Existing studies emphasize the fact that disability 
is linked to a higher likelihood of experiencing violence, in particular sexual violence. 
For too long, these survivors have been forced to endure the trauma of reliving their 
experience in courtrooms  and administrative proceedings . This bill is an essential step 
towards preventing such re -traumatization.  
 
Allowing recordings of a protected person's testimony to be admissible in court is 
crucial for the fair and just prosecution of crimes against individuals with disabilities. Survivors with disabilities often face unique challenges in relaying their experience, and the current legal system does not adequately account for those challenges. Utilizing forensic interviewing techniques and permitting the admission of recorded 
testimony  would provide some of the necessary accommodations to p eople  with 
disabilities . 
 
This bill also contains numerous safeguards to protect the rights of defendants. 
Defendants will have the opportunity to cross- examine the survivor, and forensic 
interviewers will receive the necessary specialized instruction  to conduct proper 
interview s. Additionally, the bill explicitly prohibits attorneys and relatives from being 
present during the recorded,  forensic interview. 
 
While DRM supports this bill wholeheartedly, we have two suggestions to clarify the 
language of the bill. First , we propose changing the phrase "assistant attorneys general 
who are involved in child protective cases" to "assistant attorneys general who are 
involved in child and adult protective cases." Secondly, we  suggest changing the word 
"department" to "Department of Health  and Human Services" to make it clear which 
department the legislation is referring to. Th ese change s will eliminate any ambiguity 
and ensure that the bill is effectively implemented.  
 For the reasons outlined above, DRM respectfully asks that you vote oug ht to pass.  
 Sincerely,  
   Staci Converse  
Managing Attorney  
    
 
 

