Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
Immediate Past President _ 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medlcal Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
WWW.Q]23lHEQaQ.Oi'g Maine Chapter 
ll\'CORl ’ORi\'l'l:'l) IN MAINIE 
U‘-,=',\~. 
4% 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
l)lll)l( ‘/\Tl'.l7 TO Till‘: H‘lil\l.TH OF l\l l. ClH|.DlUZN" \l"I¢_~\.*" “'h- 
/,. 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee: 
I am writing as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, and organization of over 300 health care 
practitioners devoted to improving the health and wellbeing of Maine’s 
children and youth.
Q 
Our members are often on the front lines of child abuse investigations and 
include a number of specialists in this ﬁeld. We support the passage of LD 
765, which would allow video recordings of forensic interviews of children 
to be submitted as evidence in legal proceedings. 
Because our legal system emphasizes the constitutional right of an accused 
person to cross examine witnesses in court, any measure that restricts that 
right needs to include an extensive review process to ensure that the video 
testimony is obtained appropriately. This bill contains such safeguards of 
defendants ’ due process rights. Similar bills have passed Constitutional tests 
in multiple other states. 
The purpose of the bill is to protect children from secondary trauma in 
courtrooms when giving testimony about violence they have experienced or 
witnessed. Typically, the child has been the victim of either physical or 
sexual abuse, and re-living the experience in an unfamiliar setting while 
confronting the defendant can generate high levels of acute anxiety. Asa 
policy statement from our national organization states: “long term studies 
indicate the need for ongoing psychosocial support and counseling, not only 
for any victimization that may have occurred but also for children ’s 
experiences of testifying at trial.” (Pezlintrics, vol. :39 #3) 
Providing testimony to a trained individual in a neutral, child-friendly 
environment minimizes the emotional strain on the victim related to retelling 
traumatic details. 
We believe this bill is long overdue, providing an effective and humane 
vehicle for gathering information fairly in these tragic cases, when children 
have already been subjected to toxic stress. 
S l 
I» be__ 
Sydney .Se all, MD MPH 
Hallowell
