 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 www.maineaap.org
  
 
 Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee:  I am writing as a board member and representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, an  organization of over 300 health 
care practitioners devoted to improving the health and wellbeing of Maine’s children and youth.    
 Our members are often on th e front lines of child abuse investigations and 
pediatricians are often specialists in this field.  I am wr iting to tell you we  
support the passage of LD 765, which would allow video recordings of forensic interviews of children to be submitted as evidence in legal proceedings.   
 Because our legal system emphasizes the constitutional right of an accused 
person to cross examine witnesses in court, any measure that restricts that right needs to include an extensive review process to ensure that the video testimony is obtained appropri ately.  This bill contains such safeguards of 
defendants’ due process rights.  Similar bills have passed Constitutional tests in multiple other states.  
 The purpose of the bill is to protect children from secondary trauma in 
courtrooms when giving testimony about violence they have experienced or 
witnessed . Typically, the child has been the victim of either physical or 
sexual abuse, and re -living the experience in a strange environment while 
confronting the defendant can generate high levels of acute anxiety.  As a 
policy statement from our national organization states: “long term studies 
indicate the need for ongoing psychosocial support and counseling, not only 
for any victimization that may have occurred but also for children’s 
experiences of testi fying at trial. ” (Pediatrics, vol. 139 #3)     
 
Providing testimony to a trained individual in a neutral, child- friendly 
environment minimizes the emotional strain of the victim.    
We believe this bill is long overdue, providing an effective and humane 
vehicle for gathering information fairly in these tragic cases, when children 
have already been subjected to toxic stress , and gross mistreatment. 
 
Sincerely,  
   
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH  
Hallowell 
