  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walter F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
    
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523- 9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
 
March 3, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augus ta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 765 – An Act to Permit R ecordings of a Protected Person to be Admi ssible 
 in Evidence    
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 765. 
 
LD 765 takes the radic al ste p of allowing for the admission in evidence of a recording 
of a witness interview in a criminal case.  These types of recordings are considered 
100% hearsay and are inadmissible under the Maine Rules of Evidence.  It would be 
unheard of to have a recorded witness interview admitted in evidence, and it is 
especially concerning when the recording at issue here would be of an essential 
witness, presumably the alleged victim in a case.  The Maine Rules of Evidence as 
they relate to hearsay are in place for good  reason  and have been part of our common  
law for hundreds of years.  Pla ying a recording of an interview is always considered 
to be prohibited by the r ules, and yet this bill turns the rules on their head and allows 
for hearsa y evidence to be introduced at  trial.  
 
Proponents of the bill made note that the pe rson who was the subject of the recording 
must be available for testimony.  But that is cold comfort to the  accused in a criminal 
case who will have admitted in evidence the full recording of the alleged victim and 
then testimony as well.  This ki nd of testimony would be “ buttressing”  testimony that 
would allow the alleged victim to basically be testifying twice . 
 
This bill also forces a defendant to potentially call the alleged victim and thereby 
places a defendant with a burden of proof that a defendant never has.  This is because 
in order for the recording to be admissible  the alleged victim must be “ available to 
testify or be cross -examined by any party in a criminal matter.”   If the State simply 
plays  a recording and l eaves it at that, then a defendant will have to call , in the 
defendant ’s case, the alleged victim and cr oss-examine the alleged victim at th at 
time.  Forcing a defendant to put on evidence is constituti onally barred, and this is a 
basic f oundation of our criminal justice system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this important bill.  Indeed, it is one of the 
most significant bills as it relates to the criminal justice system this session.  If this  
bill is passed, it will up root cent uries of juris prudence as it relates to hearsay 
evidence  and would also undermine the constitutional foundation as it relates to a 
defendant and a defendant ’s burden of proof.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee  
  
 
  
             
  
             
                          
                          
 

