April 20th, 2023 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Co-Chairs and Committee 
Members: 
First, thank you for allowing input during yesterday’s work session on LD1354 & 1497. I am 
happy to share my agency’s experience in the Medicare sector.  Your continued service to your 
constituents, our Maine residents, is greatly appreciated. 
I do not support this minor fix to a larger problem. I believe the Maine Bureau of Insurance 
should, in parallel with NAIC’s effort, establish a local stakeholder working group to address 
marketing issues through rulemaking while awaiting CMS and NAIC guidance. The group could 
begin drafting new legislation for a future committee’s consideration and deliberation. 
While LD 1271 is very well intentioned as amended with the insertion of the Maine Unfair Trade 
Practices Act; Title 24-A, Section 2152-B has issues. As example, 1 B should read "Medicare 
products" includes Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B (Original Medicare), Medicare Part C - 
Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicare Advantage and Medicare supplement plans.” These 
errors, missed in the 2007 revision. I suggested to this BOI last summer adding “current” definitions 
providing greater clarity including: 1 C defining “Print advertising”; 1D defining “Telephonic solicitation”; 
1E “Remote means” to cover Zoom, Facetime, Text, Email, or other “remote” signature mechanisms; 1F 
“full written copy” requiring a mailed copy of any insurance contract be sent to buyer with full agent 
identifying information for complaint tracking purposes. I have added the 2152B revisions at the end of 
this document.  
The bad actors in Medicare intentionally use multiple call centers, in multiple states, requiring 
multiple state Bureaus or Departments of Insurance, state’s Attorney’s General offices, 
Regional Medicare offices. Further, the resources of USPS Postal Inspection Service - for 
misleading postcards or letters; the FCC and/or FTC might be added as well for the plethora of 
unsolicited cold calls – a clear violation of Chapter 3 of Medicare’s Marketing Guidelines.  
These bad actors created the ultimate whack a mole game and coordination of all potential 
necessary agencies to chase complaints - never likely to happen given the magnitude of 
interagency collaboration required. Maine’s Bureau of Insurance, nor Attorney General’s Office are 
neither staffed, nor the mechanisms in place to collect and process violations for Medicare Parts C and D 
as they are outside their jurisdiction. 
While I empathize with Rep. Chipman’s constituent’s frustration of repeatedly correcting 
fraudulent plan changes, a task I complete for one of my 750+ customers every few weeks; I 
would suggest the committee look toward a comprehensive solution covering the plethora 
deceptive marketing practices. I know my phone rings several times daily for: an extended 
warranty on the 2013 Buick I never owned; pet insurance for pet’s I do not own; durable 
medical products – walkers, canes, diabetic socks; student loans; car accidents; unclaimed 
Covid relief funds; the subject changes every few months – except for that Buick! 
 
Let’s expand the definitions under Title 24-A Section 2152-B to include current practices as a 
foundation for the anticipated NAIC guidance forthcoming.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Alan Minthorn, Agency Owner, Maine Senior Insurance, LLC, Sec./Treas. NAIFA-ME 
19 Buckthorn Circle, Saco, ME 04072, Cell 207-590-6521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title 24-A Maine Insurance Code 
Chapter 23 Trade Practices and Fraud  
Section 2152-B Unfair solicitation methods (proposed)  
  
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the 
context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the 
following meanings.    
A. "Cold lead advertising" means making use directly or 
indirectly of a method of marketing that fails to disclose 
in a conspicuous manner that a purpose of the marketing 
is insurance sales solicitation, and that contact will be 
made by an insurance producer, agency, or insurance 
company.   [PL  
2007, c. 53, §1 (NEW).]  
B. "Medicare products" includes Medicare Part A, 
Medicare Part B, Medicare Part C – Medicare Advantage 
plans, Medicare Part D – Prescription Drug plans, 
Medicare  
Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans.   [ PL 2007, c. 53, 
§1  
(NEW).]  
[PL 2007, c. 53, §1 
(NEW).]   
C. “Print advertising” means use of direct mail, 
newspaper, magazine, or other “printed on paper” 
publication for the purpose of insurance sales solicitation 
by an actively licensed insurance producer, agency, or 
insurance company.  
  
D. “Telephone solicitation” means voice calling and any 
type of electronic direct messaging, such as automated or 
audio recording, interactive electronic voice technology 
or through social media analogous to text messaging. 
Post-enrollment contact regarding plan changes, care and 
care coordination, are permissible provided an opt-out 
process must be included for future communication.  
  
E. “Remote means” requires the use of telephonic, text, 
email, or internet-based enrollment tools to complete 
forms or application of an insurance policy by voice or 
digital signature by an actively licensed insurance 
agent/producer or insurance company in the physical 
absence of the enrollee.  
  
F. “Full written copy” means the printed equivalent of 
the required application and/or supporting forms, 
amended to include: the resident or non-resident licensed 
agent/producer’s NPN, name, address, and phone number 
as filed with the Bureau of Insurance, website address of 
BOI complaint webpage; insurance company complaint 
website and phone number; and Medicare complaint 
webpage information 
(https://www.medicare.gov/my/medicarecomplaint), 
where an enrollee can enter a complaint in lieu of calling 
1-800-MEDICARE.  
  
2.  Unfair solicitation methods.  It is an unfair trade 
practice under this chapter for an insurer or producer to:    
A. Sell, solicit or negotiate the purchase of health insurance 
in this State by any licensed or non-licensed individual 
through  
the use of cold lead advertising;   [PL 2007, c. 53, §1 (NEW).] B. 
Use an appointment that was made to discuss Medicare 
products or to solicit the sale of Medicare products in order 
to solicit sales of life insurance, health insurance, vision, 
dental, hearing, indemnity insurance or annuity products 
unless the consumer requests such solicitation and the 
products to be discussed are clearly identified to the 
consumer in writing at least 48 hours in advance of prior to 
the start of the  
appointment; and   [ PL 2007, c. 53, §1 (NEW).]  
C. Solicit the sale of Medicare products door-to-door prior 
to receiving an invitation from a consumer including leave 
behind marketing materials; Agents/brokers who have a 
documented pre-scheduled appointment with a potential 
enrollee who is a “no-show” may leave information at that  
enrollee’s residence. [PL 2007, c. 53, §1 (NEW).][PL 2007, c. 53, §1 
(NEW).]  
D. Publish, mail, or otherwise disseminate any print 
advertising without the licensed agent/producer’s and/or 
agency NPN, name, address, and telephone as filed with 
the Bureau of Insurance and the following disclaimer: “By 
contacting us, you may be offered insurance policies to 
purchase. This is a solicitation for insurance plans by a 
licensed insurance agent/producer, agency. or insurance 
company. The company may not offer every plan available 
in your area. Any information provided is limited to those 
plans offered in your area.”     
E. Any telephonic solicitation, without prior request to 
contact, by any licensed, non-licensed, resident, 
nonresident, for the purpose of solicitation of Medicare 
products. (Clicking a hyperlink does not constitute 
request to contact, completing a data collection form 
does.)    
F. Collect any enrollment application by remote means 
without providing a “full written copy” of the completed 
application to the applicant within 10 business days by 
mail.   
G. The use of applicant’s contact information on any 
incomplete transaction for future marketing contact after 
30 days from initial contact. Existing clients are exempt 
from the 30-day limitation, subject to client initiated do 
not contact requests.    
ALAN MINTHORN
ME SR INS LLC
LD 1271
First, thank you for allowing input during yesterday’s work session on LD1354 & 
1497. I am happy to share my agency’s experience in the Medicare sector.  Your 
continued service to your constituents, our Maine residents, is greatly appreciated.
I met with the BOI last July suggesting edits to Title 24-A Sec. 2152-B to "refresh" 
and provide a tracking mechanism for complaints. 
I would be happy to discuss these edits in a future worksession. 
