1315i Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Chipman 
3 State House Station 
S€1’l6lt€ Of Mﬂiﬂ€ Augusta ME 04333-0003 
_ , @ﬂi;@.- (207) 287-1515 
Senate District Benjamin. Cl1ipm'an@legislatare.maine gov 
Transporiafion Committee, Chan 
Taxation Committee, Member 
Testimony of Senator Ben Chipman in support of LD J 2 7], “An Act to Require a Disclaimer on 
Promotional Materials for Medicare, Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private Entities” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee of Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Ben Chipman, 
and I represent Senate District 28, which includes part of Portland in Cumberland County. I am 
before you today to introduce LD 1271, “An Act to Require a Disclaimer on Promotional 
Materials for Medicare, Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private Entities. ” 
This legislation would require private companies to put conspicuous and legible disclaimers on 
their promotional materials that include the terms “Medicare, ” “Medicaid, ” or “MaineCare. ” It is 
important that advertisments and solicitations by private companies are labelled appropriately to 
protect consumers. 
I have heard from constituents who have changed their health care plans after being sent 
promotional materials from private companies that have used Words to indicate public insurance 
involvement. Changing health care plans is an expensive and cumbersome process that can 
adversely affect consumers. Requiring visible, legible, and large disclaimers on these materials, 
consumers would be better equipped to make more informed decisions about their health care 
coverage. 
Understanding health insurance is a constant uphill battle for many and advertisements can only 
make the process more confusing. Including disclaimers on all advertisements and solicitations 
would mitigate the confusion involved in managing health insurance. 
Thank you for your consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Fax.‘ (207) 287-1585 * TTY 71] * M'essage Service 13800-423-69(3() iegis1'a!2zre. maine. gov/senate
