l\/lAlNE Assocumow 
or 
HEALTH PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt — April 6, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Neither For nor Against 
LD 1271 An Act to Require a Disclaimer on Promotional Materials for Medicare,. 
Medicaid, and MaineCare Products by Private Entities 
Senator Bailey, Representative Periy, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS /Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-proﬁt insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. 
Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people by promoting affordable, 
safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
The Bureau of Insurance licenses Maine’s health insurance carriers. These carriers frequently 
send bulletins, informational materials, statements, and correspondence to enrollees that are not 
seeking to sell or promote a product. These materials may include references to “Medicare, ” 
“Medicaid, ” or “MaineCare. ” 
An example would include the notiﬁcation required under Title 24-A, §2844 related to the 
coordination of beneﬁts under Medicare. ‘ The committee has been focusing on this notiﬁcation 
with its work on LD 308, “An Act to Require Insurance Companies Notify Workers Over 65 
Years of A ge of Potential Higher C osrs. ” The notice required by section 2844 uses the Word 
“Medicare. ” While it is not an advertisement or promotional material, it could be considered “a 
mailer,” as that term is not deﬁned. 
For many consumers, a promotional disclaimer is a shoithand for “optional reading. ” If the 
committee advances LD 1271, it should clarify that notiﬁcations and materials sent to enrollees 
regarding their existing health beneﬁts do not require promotional disclaimers. 
An exclusion for correspondence regarding existing health coverage from a health insurance 
cairier as deﬁned in Maine Statute by Title 24-A, §430l-A(3) would address these concerns. 
1 
https:/fiegislatare-.ma%ne.gov/statutes/24-A/titie24~Asec2844.htm3 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 (207) 852-2087
