0 Consumers for P-° B°><249° 
I Augusta, ME 04338 
Q‘ AffQ['dab|e Telephone. 1-soo ass-7476 
Fax: 1-888-214-5233 Yi www.ma|necahc og 
Advocating the ri ht to quality, affordable consumerhea|th@mamecahc org
8 
health care for all Mainers. 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1271, An Act to Require a Disclaimer on Promotional Materials for Medicare, 
Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private Entities 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these 
comments neither for nor against LD 1271, An Act to Require a Disclaimer on Promotional 
Materials for Medicare, Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private Entities. 
My name is Kate Ende and I am the Policy Director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care,a 
nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care for 
every person in Maine. CAHC is a nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization founded in 1988 and 
based in Augusta whose mission is to advocate the right to quality, affordable health care for 
every person in Maine. As designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s 
Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP), which operates a toll-free HelpLine. 
Our HelpLine, ﬁelds approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine 
who need help obtaining, keeping, using, or ﬁxing problems with private health insurance or 
with accessing or affording health care services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program 
for Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people apply for and navigate the 
enrollment process for MaineCare. It is with that background that We provide these comments. 
We support the intention of this bill, which we understand aims to address concerning patterns of 
false or misleading advertisements and fraudulent sales in health insurance. A majority staff 
report from the U.S. Senate Committee on Finance found that the burden of deceptive and 
predatory marketing practices falls unequally across the already vulnerable Medicare 
population. ‘ False and misleading marketing advertisements and fraudulent sales practices 
undermine access to care and the trust beneﬁciaries have in Medicare and Medicaid programs. 
Multiple states have reported instances of deceptive marketing material, such as mail that 
appeared to be official government documents or advertisements that use Medicare or Medicaid 
in the company’s name or branding? We know that this is an issue in Maine. Through our 
HelpLine, we hear from Mainers who were misled by marketing descriptions and believed they 
were purchasing or enrolling in one type of plan, when they were actually enrolling in another 
plan that wasn’t best suited to their needs. There is a clear pattern across many of the stories we 
hear from people about these types of enrollments- someone calls a phone number listed ona 
1 
https:[/www. ﬁnance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Deceptive Marketing Practices Flourish ln Medicare 
Advantagepdf 
2 lbid.
letter or other promotional material they received in the mail, and ends up inadvertently changing 
their Medicare coverage, often resulting in disastrous ﬁnancial consequences for the individual. 
When we hear about these situations, the enrollment was most often conducted over the phone 
with a broker or sales representative not based in Maine. It is clear there is a need for regulation 
of promotional materials that attempt to mislead consumers, and ultimately lead many Mainers to 
make changes to their coverage that are not in their best interest. 
Our concern lies in the scope of these regulations. This bill, as written, includes disclosure 
requirements that would apply to all informational brochures or other promotional materials 
created by an individual or entity that use the terms “MaineCare, ” “Medicare, ” or “Medicaid. ” 
As the MaineCare ombudsman program, we often create educational materials to consumers 
with important information related to MaineCare. For example, we have developed a flyer to 
inform people about changes happening to their MaineCare coverage related to the unwinding of 
the federal Public Health Emergency. While We typically don’t send out bulk mailings to 
individuals, we do sometimes distribute printed materials to organizations, such as food banks or 
libraries. We also mail printed informational materials directly to individuals, at their request. If 
this bill were to pass as written, these types of educational materials, which are not trying to sell 
or generate proﬁt from the sale of any product, may be perceived as having bias or motivated by 
proﬁt. For example, it is vital that MaineCare enrollees are aware of how the unwinding of the 
public health emergency might affect their coverage status. Other non-proﬁt organizations 
throughout the state will undoubtedly also be disseminating important notices and updates to the 
people they serve to ensure individuals are aware of the steps they need to take to avoid 
experiencing a gap in coverage. 
Ensuring organizations can share timely and accurate non-biased educational information 
concerning MaineCare and Medicare is extremely important. It is also important that consumers 
can differentiate these types of educational materials from marketing materials aimed at selling a 
product or service. For this reason, we respectfully suggest these requirements do not apply to 
materials distributed by organizations or entities that do not sell or proﬁt from the sale of health 
insurance policies or products. Thank you for your consideration and I’d be happy to answer any 
questions you might have.
