 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 6, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D.1271 An Act to Require a Disclaimer on Promotional 
Materials for Medicare, Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private 
Entities in the State before the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer comments 
in support of LD 1271. Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit 
legal services organization and our mission is to provide free legal assistance 
to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. 
 
This bill is an attempt to address one of the most prevalent banes in the lives 
of older adults who are eligible to receive medical benefits under the Federal 
Medicare program. For many, not a day goes without a phone call or a piece 
of mail that delivers a message that sounds or looks like it comes from an 
office related to Medicare or Social Security. But in reality it’s an attempt by 
a private company to convince them to sign up for health coverage that may 
not be in their best interests. This activity reaches a peak during the open 
enrollment period when Medicare recipients can change their coverage 
choices. But for many about to turn 65 it continues throughout the year.    
 
Some older adults may just be annoyed because they can’t stop the calls or 
the mail. Which is bad enough at any age. But others may be convinced that 
they are speaking with someone from the Medicare program or that the mail 
really comes from Medicare. So, they listen to the caller or they use the  
number on the mail to “get more information”. They trust what they are told 
because, after all, Medicare always helps them when they need to pay for 
 
2 
 medical care. As a result they make a decision to switch their regular 
Medicare coverage to another plan that they believe will save them money 
and get them increased benefits. Unfortunately, they eventually discover that 
their  doctor is not covered, they need special permission to see a specialist 
or the prescription drugs that they are used to taking are not available or are 
more costly. They call our Helpline and we do our best to help them solve 
their prescription drug problem or determine their legal options if they want 
to make a different choice of plan or return to their former Medicare 
coverage.  
 
The use of deceptive marketing tactics to get older adults to choose a 
Medicare Advantage plan or switch from regular fee for service Medicare to 
a Medicare Advantage plan continues to be a major nationwide problem. We 
have no issue with anyone choosing a Medicare Advantage plan if the 
decision is informed and voluntary. But choices made as the result of a 
solicitation that is intentionally misleading and deceptive seldom are. 
 
For a national perspective on this problem the report of the United States 
Senate Committee on Finance announced on November 3, 2022, presents a 
comprehensive view. The executive summary mentions the very practices 
that are the basis for this bill: 
       
“The Committee received evidence of fraudulent and misleading marketing practices 
from states and other stakeholders – painting a consistent national picture. These issues 
were reported more frequently with respect to MA plans compared to stand-alone Part D 
plans. In addition, nine of the ten states reporting quantitative complaint information 
found an increase in complaints from 2020 to 2021 that mirrored the trend found by 
CMS.2 
 
Information submitted by states demonstrates that beneficiaries are inundated with 
fraudulent and misleading communications across all modes of communication (in-
person, television, telemarketer, and robo-calls).3 An egregious example submitted by 
the states includes marketing materials designed to look like official 
communications from Federal agencies. A number of states also raised concerns 
with the use of “Medicare” in the naming and branding of marketing companies to 
suggest that a marketing company is representing the Medicare program. These 
practices are intentionally deceptive as they blur the lines between official 
government communication and private health plan marketing.” (emphasis added)  
https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Deceptive%20Marketing%2
0Practices%20Flourish%20in%20Medicare%20Advantage.pdf  
  
 
3 
 This bill takes a small step in the direction of making the marketing of 
Medicare program coverage more transparent. The printing requirements are 
not directed at public entities. They are intended to discourage only those 
private entities that are out to profit at the expense of older adults through 
deceptive means. The Medicare program presents more opportunity to reach 
a population of older adults with guaranteed monthly income and growing 
health care needs. However, dishonest actors will use Medicare, Medicaid, 
MaineCare or the name of any other government agency if they think it will 
give them the opportunity to make “easy” money.  
 
We believe that this type of financial exploitation deserves more attention 
and that this bill could be the first step. While not included in the text before 
you, we suggest that you consider an amendment making a violation of the 
printing requirements a specific unfair trade practice under Title 5 
Chapter10. This would create a clear judicial remedy for this behavior and 
under the right circumstances it may prove useful.    
 
We hope that you will vote this bill ought to pass and thank you for giving 
us the opportunity to share our thoughts with you.  
 
