  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 6 , 202 3 
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1271  – An Act to Require a Disclaimer on Promotional Materials for Medicare, 
Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private Entities  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1271 , An Act to Require a Disclaimer on 
Promotional Materials for Medicare, Medicaid and MaineCare Products by Private Entities .  
 
This bill requires, on promotional material by private entities using the terms "Medicare," 
"Medicaid" or "MaineCare," prominent disclaimers stating the promotional material is an 
advertisement or solicitation by a private c ompany that is not Medicare, Medicaid or MaineCare 
or any other governmental agency, and that these disclaimers and any other disclaimer on the 
material be in a large type size and distinctive type color.  
 
The Department appreciates the intent behind this bill, but there may be unintended 
consequences. The Department contracts with and otherwise relies on various organizations for 
outreach and education efforts to members. For example, we contract with Consumers for 
Affordable Health Care, and are funding n umerous Community Based Organizations for 
outreach  as the public health emergency comes to a close and we are working to review a large 
number of Medicaid determinations through “unwinding .” We are unclear how this bill would 
separate their work that is informational but not advertising and solicitation.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact us. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

