‘ii-i 
1 W- ~55-> .';.1 
"‘!:-»: . . .§._'§. , 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (207) 287-1400 
Raymond, ME 04071 MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
Jessica.Fay_@legislaturemaine.gov 
April 25, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay introducing 
LD 1409, An Act to Require Reimbursement When a Municipality Hires First 
Responders Whose Training Costs Were Incurred by Another Municipality 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Good aftemoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the State and 
Local Government Committee. I am Jessica Fay, and I represent House District 86. I regret thatI 
can’t be with you today to present this bill in person, but I am grateful to Senator Nangle for 
stepping in. 
Thank you for the opportunity to sponsor LD 1409, An Act to Require Reimbursement When 
a Municipality Hires First Responders Whose Training Costs Were Incurred by Another 
Municipality. 
Last fall, the Chief of Raymond Fire and Rescue sent me a message asking that “something be 
done” about the cost that the Town of Raymond was incurring for training and other expenses 
associated with new hires, only to have those hires leave shortly after the training had been 
completed. 
I recognize this is a complicated issue. It is a workforce shortage issue, an issue of pay and 
compensation, a rural public safety issue and an issue of fairness. Further complications exist 
when a ﬁrst responder works part-time at one job and full-time for another municipality. In order 
to simplify the bill, we decided to have this reimbursement only apply to full-time employees in 
ﬁre/rescue. I want to be very clear, the goal of this bill is in no way meant to abrogate the ability 
of ﬁre and rescue personnel from working in multiple jurisdictions or from taking any job they 
choose. The goal is simply to reimburse a municipality, who has paid for training in expectation 
that an employee will continue to work for that municipality, if that employee moves on. 
The bill is drafted based on the system currently in place for attendance at the Criminal Justice 
Academy, which I understand isn’t a perfect framework for what is a common-sense policy idea. 
This committee understands the issues facing municipalities and the challenges of hiring and 
crafting budgets, and this is an issue I am conﬁdent that We can all work together on to ﬁnd an 
appropriate mechanism to make it work. 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
Whether We land on a potential ﬁxed number, a percentage over time, a common pool of funds 
that would be there for training or some other suggestion that could come up in the next few 
Weeks, I am hopeful that we can work together along with all the stakeholders to address what 
seems to be a common concern, particularly for smaller more rural Departments. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I look forward to the work we will do together.
