MA|NE MUN|C|pAL l~800—l+52—8786(in state) 
, (T) 207-e23~a42s 
ASSOCIATION SWQE "5936 (F)207_624_m29 
60 Community Drive l Augusto, ME 010330-9486 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 1409- An Act to Require Reimbursement When a Municipality Hires First Responders Whose Training 
Costs Were Incurred by Another Municipality 
April 25, 2023 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in support for LD 1409, An Act 
to Require Reimbursement When a Municipality Hires First Responders Whose Training Costs Were 
Incurred by Another Municipality, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the 
interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established 
by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards 
of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
Municipal ofﬁcials appreciate this bill proposal as they struggle to backﬁll vacancies for these 
vital positions across all communities. A similar bill forms part of MMA’s platform this session as it 
pertains to emergency service dispatchers and communication oﬁicers. To that end, we asked Rep. Faye if 
she would consider adding this position to her bill and she agreed. 
One of the issues this bill may have unlike the current reimbursement process for law 
enforcement oﬁicers is the multiple credentials each of these ﬁrst responders receive from multiple 
different training providers, travel costs, and what each service might calculate for these costs. With 
regard to public safety communications training, MMA has conducted an initial review of what agencies 
are requiring at the base level and has conducted a survey on the average costs for training. 
Consistent training across all surveyed agencies: 
Certiﬁed Terminal Operator Metro/NCIC Emergency Telecommunicators Course, Emergency Medical 
Dispatcher, Emergency Fire Dispatcher, NextGen 911 Certiﬁcation, Maine EMD License, Certiﬁed 
Terminal Operator, CPR, Notary, (EMD, EFD, ETC, ProQA, CTO, NG911, OUTEC, FEMA Training, 
NCMEC, METRO/NICIC) 
Average training time all certiﬁcations and on the job training (OTJ): 
4- ,6 months before they can be moderately unsupervised. 
Average Cost of Training: 
$15,000—$20,000 
(Average salary for the 18 weeks of training was reported around $16,650 with another $13,536 for Field 
Training Oﬁicer salary, $280 for Metro Class, Average Meal & Mileage $200 x 6 trips to Maine Criminal 
Justice Academy)
With regard to EMS and Fire Services, it is important that costs assumed by part-time or rural 
agencies with per diem and volunteer provision, these communities may have varying costs but 
signiﬁcant lose out when a volunteer provider is hired by a full-time agency even when that agency 
further enhances their training. Their initial experience and certiﬁcation are not replaced for that volunteer 
agency and if a consistent level of expenditure could be prorated, those initial training costs could be 
returned to those communities not only to beneﬁt additional replacement costs, but also to enhance the 
training provided to volunteers who will never leave that level of service, but may be able to enhance 
their own training for the beneﬁt of their community. 
Officials believe that this reciprocity between communities will help not only stem the bleed of 
stealing ﬁnite employees from each other, but also honor those costs in communities that are unlike to be 
a full-time level service, though still need individuals to aid them addressing public safety threats 
provided on shoestring budget. 
To that end, the Association is happy to assist the committee as it explores this option to arrive at 
a median farm number that can be prorated based on costs at each level of basic training for these needed 
employees and that desired credentials each service needs.
