S'ru":~10r1 Muss 
()FFl('E or 'rm= , Gowmxon 
é iS'r,a"rr: Hotrsr; S'r,\'rrot\" 
A\Y(;t¢s'm, Mame 
04333-@001 
JANET Mars I).-ta: B1 amass 
GOVERNOR DiRF.CT()R OF GOVER:‘~€OR"S 
ENERGY ()FF[('TFI 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND HOUSING 
An Act to Provide Energy Efficiency Program Outreach and Assistance to Manufactured 
Housing Residents 
L.D. 815 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFlCE 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing: My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the Governor's Energy Office 
(GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 815. 
Maine has long been a national outlier for reliance on oil, which includes kerosene, and is currently the 
most home heating oil dependent state in the nation with nearly 60 percent of households using fuel oil 
for their primary home heating source — this is compared to four percent nationally. Of Maine's 
approximately 570,000 homes, over half of owned and two-thirds of rented dwellings were built in 1960 
or earlier and suffer from energy inefficient weatherization. 
As a result of global market events, the price of energy has experienced unprecedented volatility and 
Maine consumers have felt the brunt of that this heating season. This has impacted the electricity 
market, as well as delivered fuels - heating oil, kerosene and natural gas in particular. Governor Mills 
and the legislature approved the Emergency Winter Energy Relief Plan which provides direct relief to 
Maine people to help them stay warm, safe, and secure this winter. 
While heating oil and kerosene prices have declined from historic highs, these fuels remain higher than 
pre-pandemic levels and these prices are felt acutely by those of low income that can least afford. 
Recent GEO analysis of lVlaineHousing ’s Low income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) 
payments show that this is especially true for kerosene customers. Kerosene, which at times was 
difficult to get delivery this fall, was the main heating source for more than 9,500 of the roughly 11,600 
(82 percent) manufactured homes in LIHEAP in FY22. The GEO is continuing to engage with industry and 
state agencies on this issue. 
Maine is making significant progress on reducing this reliance and Maine's four-year climate action plan, 
Maine Won't Wait, established heat pump and weatherization goals aimed at reducing the state's 
reliance on fossil fuels, including: 
0 installation of 100,000 new heat pumps by 2025 with 15,000 new heat pumps being provided to 
income-eligible households; and
1
0 Weatherization of 35,000 homes and businesses by 2030 to include at least 1,000 low-income 
residential units per year. 
The GEO is broadly supportive of efforts to increase energy literacy among all Maine people, and 
especially among those with the greatest energy burden. This legislation would support education and 
outreach regarding energy efficiency awareness and programming available in the state with a focus on 
residents of manufactured housing and mobile homes. Manufactured housing in the U.S., and 
particularly older manufactured housing, has typically been inefficient, and occupants often face high 
heating and cooling costs. 
Increased energy literacy will help dwelling occupants make informed energy usage decisions and self- 
identify ways to save money based on an understanding of the impacts and consequences of a range of 
fuel types and efficiency measures, and available efficiency and weatherization programs administered 
by the Efficiency Maine Trust and the Maine State Housing Authority. 
Both Efficiency Maine Trust and the Maine State Housing Authority currently offer a strong suite of 
efficiency and weatherization programs, including those targeted toward low-income consumers and 
occupants of manufactured homes. Some of those programs include: 
Efficiency Maine Trust 
0 Heat Pump Rebates for Low and Moderate-Income Mainers: $2,000 for the first eligible heat 
pump and up to $400 for a second eligible heat pump. This program does have eligibility 
requirements including that the home will not receive a heat pump through the Maine State 
Housing Authority, and that they qualify for another state or federal assistance program such as 
the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP), the Temporary Assistance for Need Families (TANF) program, or MaineCare. 
0 A demonstration program to install whole-home heat pumps in mobile homes. 
Maine State Housing Authority 
0 MaineHousing ’s heat pump program pays for the full cost and installation of a heat pump for 
eligible Maine homeowners. Homeowners eligible for HEAP may be eligible for this program. 
0 Pre-1976 Mobile Home Replacement initiative: This program provides income-eligible Maine 
residents with the opportunity to replace a pre—1976 mobile home with a new Energy Star 
certified manufactured home. 
However, there is more work that can be done to facilitate greater access to these programs. The GEO is 
a frequent collaborator with both Efficiency Maine Trust and the Maine State Housing Authority and 
would seek to support efforts to develop cost-effective education, outreach, and technical assistance to 
increase energy literacy and the awareness and usage of existing energy efficiency and weatherization 
offerings by low and moderate-income homeowners and renters in Maine, including residents of 
manufactured housing. Finally, the GEO is anticipating federal funds for electrification and 
weatherization to come to Maine in late 2023 or early 2024 to focus on this population, but more work 
will need to be done to reach the need of these residents. We look forward to working with the bill 
sponsor and interested parties on this legislation. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Caroline Colan, Legis a ive Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
