26 Edison Drive I Augusta, Maine 04330-6046 I 207-626-4600 § 800-452-4668 I Maine Relay 711 I Fax 207-626-4678 I mainehousmg org Z X “rs; 
Q ~i -1 MaineHousing MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
T€Jﬁ77Z0l?)/ of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before t/we 
joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
N eit/we/' For N 0/"Agaimt 
LD 815 - An Act to Provide Energy Efficiency Program Outreach and Assistance to Manufactured 
Housing Residents 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Labor and Housing Committee, my 
name is Erik jorgensen, and I serve as Senior Director of Government Relations and 
Communications at MaineHousing. I 
The Maine State Housing Authority is Maine’s housing finance agency, created by the legislature in 
1969 to address the problems of unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are 
authorized to issue bonds to fnance single-family and multi-family housing for Maine’s low and 
moderate income citizens. These bonds carry the moral obligation of the state; they are repaid from 
mortgage payments, not the General Fund. We are not part of state government, but are structured 
as an independent agency to utilize effective private methods of finance for public purposes, to be 
independent, and responsive. 
We are also authorized to act for the state in adniinistering several federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, Weatherization and fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing Opportunities 
for Maine (HOME) Fund to support our programs. 
I am here today to commend Representative Golek on this bill. We agree with the aims of this 
legislation, and would be glad to work with our colleagues at the Efficiency Maine Trust on ﬁnding 
ways to improve outreach to residents of manufactured housing. Efficiency Maine Trust is a science- 
based organization with whom we Work closely and often collaborate, and we rely on their high level 
of technical expertise in areas relating to Weatherization, heat pumps and similar subjects covered by 
this bill.
That said, I would suggest that much of what this bill calls for is already being done. While there are 
times when it makes sense to differentiate between manufactured housing and other forms of 
housing, in most cases our programming is characterized less by housing form than by resident 
income. We can show you manufactured homes that are superbly insulated and worth several hundred 
thousand dollars just as we can show you stick-built homes that are substandard, drafty and in dire 
need of work. With the exception of certain ﬁnancing programs (such as our mobile home 
replacement initiative), our funding is not set up to favor a particular form of housing over another. 
I would also point out that manufactured homes are a signiﬁcant part of our work already, even 
though we do not market to them speciﬁcally. Consider that in program year 2023 (our current 
program year, just about 1/3 of our heat pump installations have been in manufactured homes. That’s 
940 out of around 3300 installations. 
All of our energy efﬁciency programs, including heat pumps and weatherization services, are already 
aimed by law at low and moderate income Mainers, and that same law speciﬁes that we serve whose 
heating burdens are the highest, both of which are speciﬁed in this bill. I should also add that 
MaineHousing and Efﬁciency Maine Trust have robust, multi-platform program marketing budgets, 
much o_f which is highly targeted. If there are ways we could better direct marketing speciﬁcally to 
occupants of manufactured housing, we would certainly consider that, and, of course we are always 
happy to work with the folks at EMT. We are not entirely sure, however, that a law change is 
necessary to make that happen. 
Thank you and I am happy to answer your questions.
2
