 
Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters
“An Act to Provide Energy Efficiency Program Outreach and Assistance to 
Manufactured Housing Residents”
Before the Committee on Labor and Housing
March 21, 2023
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on Labor and Housing: 
My name is Kathleen Meil and I serve as Senior Director of Policy & Partnerships at Maine 
Conservation Voters and co-chair of the Maine Climate Council’s Buildings, Infrastructure, and 
Housing Working Group. Maine Conservation Voters represents more than 13,000 members and 
supporters dedicated to protecting Maine’s environment and our democracy and to ensuring an 
equitable clean energy transition for all Maine people.
Today, that means testifying in support of LD 815, “An Act to Provide Energy Efficiency 
Program Outreach and Assistance to Manufactured Housing Residents.” 
Maine people are experiencing higher energy prices this winter as a result of volatile global 
markets and our state’s ongoing over-reliance on fossil fuels. Nearly 60 percent of Maine homes 
rely on heating oil, compared to the national average of 4 percent, making ours the most heating-
oil dependent state in the nation. Furthermore, the New England electric grid, which supplies 
power to most of Maine, is over-reliant on natural gas to generate electricity. As this winter 
makes clear, unpredictable energy prices strain the budgets and patience of many Maine families, 
and they are felt most acutely by low income households and those living in energy inefficient 
homes, including manufactured housing.
Maine Conservation Voters applauds Governor Mills and the legislature for swiftly approving 
the Emergency Winter Relief Plan in December 2022 to provide direct relief to Maine people. 
This near-term solution is complimented by the state’s ambitious four-year plan for climate 
action, Maine Won’t Wait, which set goals to reduce Maine’s dependence on fossil fuels and 
prepare all Maine people and communities to be resilient to climate impacts. Specific to home 
heating, the the plan established targets to install 100,000 high-efficiency electric heat pumps by 
2025 and to weatherize 35,000 homes and businesses by 2030. Because equitable 
implementation is an organizing principle of Maine Won’t Wait, those targets specify that least 
15,000 heat pumps be provided to income-eligible households and that at least 1,000 low-income 
residential units be weatherized each year. 
As other testimony has indicated, Maine is well on its way to meeting these targets thanks to 
strong efficiency and weatherization programs, including those targeted toward low-income 
consumers and occupants of manufactured homes, offered by Efficiency Maine Trust (EMT) and 
Maine State Housing Authority (MSHA). Current and potential participants in these programs 
and additional efforts to enhance energy literacy will benefit from unprecedented federal 
investment for building electrification and weatherization (among many, many other climate and 
affordable clean energy initiatives funded through the Inflation Reduction Act).
LD 815 builds on Maine’s already-strong commitment to and track record of providing energy 
efficiency resources and programs to homeowners and renters with the highest energy burdens. 
This was a particular focus of the Climate Council’s Buildings, Infrastructure, and Housing 
Working Group, and the Equity Subcommittee further refined recommended strategies to ensure 
that the benefits of building modernization and clean energy upgrades reach all Maine people, 
with an emphasis on renters. Maine Conservation Voters encourages this Committee to consult 
the Equity Subcommittee’s draft final report, especially Strategy B: Modernize Maine Buildings, 
which details goals to increase weatherization, home retrofits, and heat pump installation for 
low-income households, renters, and in rural communities.
Further collaboration and coordination the many individuals and entities already committed to 
these goals will ensure that Maine’s bold climate and clean energy goals are equitably achieved. 
Maine Conservation Voters supports LD 815 as a powerful step toward accelerating these efforts 
and urges you to vote “ought to pass.”
Thank you.
Kathleen Meil
Senior Director of Policy and Partnerships
Maine Conservation Voters
