Matthew Gilley
Harpswell
LD 815
Hello Senator Tipping and representative Roeder and members of the labor and housing 
committee. My name is Matthew Gilley and I am a lifelong resident of Harpswell. I am here 
today to testify in opposition to LD 815  An Act to Provide Energy Efficiency Program 
Outreach and Assistance to Manufactured Housing Residents. There are aspects of the bill 
that I agree with. I completely support creating a support system to help educate and make 
low income families aware of some energy saving steps they can take to save money. I am 
not in agreement with providing funds funds to do so. First off I see no fiscal note attached to 
this bill. How much is this going to cost the state and where are the funds coming from? The 
study done by efficiency maine is 6 years old at this point and energy prices have changed 
considerably. Electric rates have skyrocketed and are only going to continue to go higher with
the reliance on offshore wind for power. Mainers have limited choices on where to get their 
electricity from even more limited than the fossil fuel market. It was far cheaper to heat my 
house this winter with propane then it would of been with a heat pump. My propane bill was 
less per month then my electric bill with no heat pump. There is no way I could of afforded a 
electric bill that was double or triple what it was if I had a heat pump installed. Heat pumps 
also rely on the outside air to heat the home and there are multiple studies showing even 
energy efficient homes need a secondary heat source when the temperatures drop below 0 
and that happens every winter in maine. How will we determine eligibility for this program? 
Will it have to be a HUD approved home to be eligible? How many homes are pre 1976 in this
state and wouldn’t fall under HUD? How much are we going to spend to help winterize some 
of these homes? Will there be a cap? While in theory this bill means well there are to many 
unanswered questions. I hope you vote against this bill.
Thank you
Matthew Gilley

