 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Administrative Hearings  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel.: (207) 624-5350 ; Fax: (207) 287 -8448  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
May 10, 2023  
 
Senator Jo seph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 17 29 – An Act to Reduce Child Care Provider Regulation  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services : 
 
The Division of Administrative Hearings (DAH) for the Department o f Health and Human 
Services  (DHHS) opposes LD 1729 , An Act to Reduce Child Care Provider Regulation.  This 
letter is focused on th e section of LD 1729 establishing  a Child Care Appeal Review Panel  to 
hear all disputes of child care facilities , family child care providers , and nursery schools .  
 
This letter seeks to address concerns that DAH is biased regarding child care licensing appeals or 
any other appeals from the Office of Child and Family Services . The Division of Administrative 
Hearings handles all administrative appeals of DHHS decisions.  We are not associated with the 
Office of Child and Family Services or any other service -providing Office within  the 
Department.  We are under the purview of the Commissioner’s Office . We conduct hearings 
pursuant to  the Administrative Procedure Act and the Department’s Administrative Hearing 
Regulations  (10-144 CMR Ch. 1 ). Hearing Officers are required to be unbiased and to have no 
prior involvement in the decision being appealed.  The p arties are not allowed to have contact 
with the Hearing Officer without the other party being present.  Hearings are  conducted under a 
de novo review  standard . Facts are determined anew.  There is no presumption made for or 
against the Department.  Testimony is submitted under oath subject to cross -examination.  The 
appellant may call his or her  own witnesses or subpoena witnesses if he or she wishes . The 
Hearing Officer is required to issue an independent decision without deference to the action 
being appealed.   
 
For a n appeal of a civil penalty, the Hearing Office r’s decision would constitute the final agency 
action of the Department.  If the Hearing O fficer upholds the civil penalty, the appellant can 
appeal to the Superior Court.  For more serious licensing actions such as a denial of an 
application for a license, the issuance of a conditional license, or the revocation of a license , the 
Hearing Office r issues a Recommended Decision  to the Commissioner.  The parties are given 
twenty days to submit exceptions and responses to the Recommended Decision . The 
Recommended Decision  and any exceptions and responses  are then submitted to the 
Commissioner , who mak es the final decision.  If the Commission er upholds the Recommended 
Decision , then the appellant can appeal to the Superior Court.   
 
2 
  
Currently, there is no appeal process for the minor decisions made in inspection reports.  
However, if the Department were to  base an appealable licensing decision u pon such inspection 
reports , the Department would be required to prove those minor violations at the hearing  under a 
de novo standard.  The appellant would have an opportunity to dispute them at the hearing.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information on LD 17 29. I would be happy to provide 
any additional information that the Committee may want or need.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Joseph Pickering  
Joseph Pickering  
Chief Administrative Hearing Officer  
Division of Administrative Hearings  
   
