'7 
M/\l>lt »\§~<i‘OR[)/\5Lt 
, guousmc (TOM iT§Ol~l 
131“ Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition 
In favor of LD 1593 - An Act to Increase Affordable Housing Development 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Bi 
McCollister and lam the President of the Resurgam Group, I appreciate the chance to present testimony on behalf of 
the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (|\/IAHC). As a nonprofit membership organization representing over 140 Maine 
development, engineering, design, construction, and housing services organizations, our mission is to advocate for the 
creation and preservation of affordable housing for all Maine residents. We are testifying today in favor of LD 1593 -An 
Act to Increase Affordable Housing Development 
The state's housing crisis has left over 25,000 individuals on waitlists for affordable housing, while only an average of 
250 units of affordable housing are constructed each year. 
LD1593 proposes removing several barriers that prevent the development of affordable housing. Specifically, the bill 
eliminates minimum lot size requirements for any multiple unit housing and dwelling unit density requirements for 
single-family or multifamily housing development. This change would promote the construction of affordable housing 
units and make it easier for developers to construct them. 
The bill also removes minimum size requirements for accessory dwelling units outside of the Maine Uniform Building 
and Energy Code. This change would empower homeowners to create additional housing units on their property and 
provide more affordable housing options for renters. Moreover, this bill prohibits municipalities from enforcing zoning 
restrictions that prohibit residential housing, prohibit existing structures from being used for residential housing, or 
impose unit size requirements for residential housing. This would allow communities to be more accommodating and 
affordable to individuals from different walks of life. 
We support the sponsor's amendment, because it would ensure that affordable housing is not built in unsafe, industrial 
areas, it would reinstate the affordable housing density bonus, and it would protect key farming lands as designated by 
towns. 
We urge you to support LD1593 and take action to increase affordable housing development in Maine. By updating 
zoning regulations and removing barriers, we can make every Maine community more welcoming and affordable for all 
individuals. Thank you for your consideration. 
mainehousingcoalilionorg info@mainehousingcoalition.orq 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101
