 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1593-An Act to Increase Affordable Housing Development  
 
Joint S elect Committee on Housing  
April  25, 2023 
 
Senator  Pierce , Representative  Gere  and members of the Committee  on Housing , 
 
I am  Eamonn Dundon , the Director of Advocacy of  the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce , 
representing 1,300 businesses that employ over 65,000 Mainers in our region . We are submitting this written 
testimony  to express our organization's strongest support for  LD 1593 .  
 
This legislation wil l empower  every community in our state to embrace the full vision of LD 2003 , which seeks 
to enable gentle densification of housing in all areas of our state while allowing municipalities control over the 
form and design of such housing. From height  and setbacks  to design guidelines and mixed -use requirements, 
municipalities would still have the authority  to regulate  the aspects  of real estate development that  are most 
important to their  residents, while unlocking untold opportunities for new housing  option s.  
 
As the implementation of LD 2003 has progressed  in many communities in our region, we have observed  that 
the minimum  lot sizes retained by municipalities are posing a significant barrier to achieving meaningful 
progress in housing production, as envis ioned by LD 2003 . For instance,  in Cape Elizabeth, even with the 
proposed amendments to comply  with LD 2003, many residential zones still require  lot sizes exceeding  60,000 
square feet per unit1. In Falmouth , their proposed amendments retain the stipulation that no residential zone 
can require less than 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit, with many zones demanding over 40,000 square feet 
per unit2. Even in the City of Portland, th e densest  community  in our  state, there are  still zones that mandate 
over 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit3. Such low levels of density fall far short of fully realizing the vision 
of LD 2003.  
 
A report4 prepared in 2021 by former City of Portland Director of Planning  Jeff Levine  reveals that nearly 85% 
of land in our region either prohibits  multifamily housing, or imposes  numerous barriers that make it practically 
infeasible to produce enough units to address our housing deficit . Onl y a mere  1.6% of land  in ou r region  
imposes “few limits” on the construction of multifamily housing . The primary  barrier identified in this report 
is the requirement for large lot areas and large lot areas per dwelling unit. To achieve meaningful  multifamily 
production  at scale, lot size requirements must stay below  20,000 square feet for the total development and 
5,000 square feet per unit for most projects  to be feasible. As can be demonstrated by the examples above , our 
current environment falls far short of being conductive to vi able multifamily production due to these minimum 
lot size restrictions.  
 
As we have consistently emphasized  throughout the entire LD 2003 process last year and the work of this 
committee this year, our goal is not to strip  municipalities  of their  ability to regulate the design and character 
of their communities through tools like design review, height restrictions, and form -based  codes . However,  we  
 
 
1 Cape Elizabeth LD 2003 Land Use Code Amendments  
2 Falmouth LD 2003 Land Use Code Amendments  
3 City of Portland Land Use Code, (Page 109)  
4 Multifamily Housing & Land Use Regulation: Metro Regional Coalition, Greater Portland Council of 
Governments  
 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
must address  their ability to restrict property rights, contribute to sprawl, and deny housing opportuniti es if we 
are genuinely committed to  the intertwined goals of economic growth and sustainability.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for your expeditious approval of this 
important legislation.  
  
