 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Support of LD 1593 (“An Act to Increase Affordable Housing Development”)   J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  April 25, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 1593. The bill is a complement to the landmark legislation sponsored by former Speaker Fecteau last session (PL 672 “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”). That law encouraged Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) development by requiring all municipalities to allow them – thus ensuring that any property owner may choose to contribute to increasing housing supply by developing an ADU on their property. LD 1593 would complement PL 672 by removing minimum lot size and dwelling unit density requirements.  It would make residential zoning permissible in any municipal zone, thus adding to the options of creating housing supply and mixed-use properties. In so doing, LD 1593, like PL 672, would ensure that property rights remain respected, and property owners can choose to develop or use their property to add to Maine’s needed housing inventory. We need more housing units and that’s exactly what LD 1593 would help to make happen.  For these reasons, we support LD 1593 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought To Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.   
