MA|NE MUN|c|pAL 1-800452-a7se(m state) 
(T) 20"/~62;-8428 
ASSOCIATION SINCE wee (F),O.,_m_m,9 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-9li86 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 1593- An Act to Increase Affordable Housing Development 
April 23, 2023 
Sen. Pierce, Rep. Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 1593, An Act to Increase Aﬂordable 
Housing Development, on behalf of Maine Municipal Association which represents the interests of 
municipal government before the state and federal government. The positions of the Association are 
formed at the direction of our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee, (LPC) who are elected by the 
selectboards and council of the municipalities in each of the 35 Senate districts in Maine. As a result, the 
positions represent a wide view of communities with varying resources, rural and urban, and those with 
ample local resources as well as those with none. 
The ﬁrst section that amends the state minimum lot size requirements is probably intended to 
eliminate/reduce conﬂicts with LD 2003 provisions regulating dimensional requirements and allow for 
more ﬂexibility to allow additional units on lots. Unfortunately, the policy implication is that lots with 
multifamily units will now be allowed on smaller lots, which could signiﬁcantly impact other planning 
related issues like ensuring that proper infrastructure exists to support the additional development. 
In communities that are MS4 permitted communities, the existence of a mechanism to decouple 
old, combined sewer and stormwater connections to new EPA standards, and prove that additional 
development near urban impacted streams could be upended meaning those towns may face penalties for 
non-compliance to their permits without the ability to limit or ensure there is proper conveyance to handle 
both wastewater and impervious surface run off. While it may reconcile the statute to recent rulemaking, 
it will cause the need for additions to sewer ordinances and 3"‘ party technical review as the DHHS 
subsurface disposal rules state the department is responsible for “permitting the systems but not 
responsible for the accuracy of ﬁeld data, assumptions of conclusions of the designer, or suitability of 
design or performance. ” 
The new section 43 52-A appears to conﬂict with other statutes and land use/planning principals 
that are important to the people of the state and local communities. For example, the provision that 
prohibits a municipality from adopting any provision that prohibits residential housing in any zoning 
district will likely mean that the state shoreland zoning requirements will be overridden, as they prohibit 
most housing in resource protection zones for environmental protection reasons. It may also conﬂict with 
ﬂoodplain regulations and national ﬂood insurance goals. It could also prohibit industrial and commercial 
zones, which may be necessary or desirable to prevent residential uses for health and safety reasons, such 
as in previous brownﬁeld sites where industry but not residential buildings are allowed.
Also, the reference in LD 1593 to prohibiting a “zoning” ordinance from prohibiting housing 
probably would be interpreted to allow other non-zoning land use ordinances to continue in effect 
including, minimum subsurface wastewater requirements or the plumbing code. This is confusing when 
paired with the ﬁrst section, and may eliminate an occupancy permit as its authority lives in Title 25 Ch. 
313 §2357-A. 
Sec. 3, removes the density bonus, which is desirable in some communities, as this provision has 
been confusion and may lessen the need for ordinance adoption. And ﬁnally, Sec. 4 further highlights the 
need for the delay of implementation as the rulemaking only just eliminated the minimum size 
requirements while the statute has retained them. 
For all these reason, ofﬁcials are opposed to the sections of the law that further confuse 
communities attempting to work through this process currently.
