Maine Education Association
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
Testimony
In Support
LD 386: An Act to Assist Schools with Heating and Transportation Fuel Costs During the 
School Year 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee
February 23, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 386:  An Act to Assist Schools with 
Heating and Transportation Fuel Costs During the School Year.
We have all felt the impact of volatile energy prices.  The price of gas, oil, propane and other fossil fuels 
has skyrocketed due to the Russian attack on Ukraine and other factors.  For private sector employers, 
the increased cost in energy costs can be passed on to customers, or absorbed via other cuts or budget 
belt tightening.  But this is not so easy for public schools, who have to work within voter-approved 
budgets.  Wild fluctuations such as what we have seen over the past year or more places more strain on 
public schools.  Collectively, across the state, school districts set aside millions of dollars to cover their 
energy needs.  But given the volatility and wild fluctuations in energy prices, it is no wonder some 
districts have struggled to adequately plan and prepare for the higher costs of gas, diesel, oil and 
propane.  These energy costs are a substantial cost to districts, and any help from the state would be 
much appreciated.  
As you can see in the chart below, gas prices have increased nearly five-fold between March 2020 and 
March of 2022.  (It is important to note; the chart below is from the U.S. Energy Information 
Administration and tracks the wholesale/resale prices of gasoline.)  If a district typically budgets 
$500,000 for gas/diesel costs for buses, given the prices increases they may need to budget nearly $3 
million to fully cover the cost of gas/diesel for their bus fleet.  This is a sizeable increase and we fully 
expect districts will have to adjust their budgets to cover these increases in fuel costs.  
Maine Education Association
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
  
.
And while oil and propane cost increases have not been as stark as the price of gasoline/diesel, we know 
these costs too have risen.  According to the Governor’s Energy Office, the cost of heating oil hovered 
around $5.00 per gallon in April/May of 2022, just as many school districts were preparing their annual 
budget for voter approval.  Yet by November of 2022, the average cost had risen to $5.71 per gallon – a 
substantial increase, especially for schools which may use hundreds of gallons of oil per week.  
We are unsure why the figure of $18 million was selected for this proposal and we encourage the 
Committee to consider a better accounting of the energy cost increases in this proposal, but we certainly 
support the central idea and hope the Committee will find ways to support this proposal in some form.  
Lastly, the volatility in energy prices is a reminder that schools, like other sectors, must wean away from 
dirty, polluting fossil fuels and embrace clean energy proposals.  Cleaner, greener energy sources such 
as solar and wind power among others require upfront costs but provide long term savings and protect 
our school budgets from the fluctuations we have seen and likely will continue to see as much of the 
world shifts away from fossil fuels.  The MEA supports Carbon Free, Healthy Schools campaign and we 
stand ready to work with our members, school boards and administrators to help schools transition away 
from fossil fuels.
Thank you for your attention and please reach out with any questions you may have.  
