Margaret Parkhurst
Saco School Department
LD 386
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Meg Parkhurst, and I represent the Dayton, Saco, and Biddeford School 
Departments and our nearly 5,000 students. I rise in support of LD 386, and offer our 
districts’ thanks to Representatives Davis and Perry, and Senator Moore.  
This bill appears to have bipartisan support, and as important, its impact can benefit 
rural and urban, northern and southern schools alike.   
By way of brief background, our central office has voluntarily consolidated several 
administrative and purchasing functions, with each of our three towns maintaining 
independent Boards and budgets.  One of the goals of our arrangement is to drive 
down costs for taxpayers by realizing certain efficiencies, including bulk purchasing 
of everything from photocopying to electricity.  
This year has been especially challenging for our schools. We are looking at a 
combined loss of over half a million dollars in state subsidy across our three districts 
for the next fiscal year at a time when inflation is hitting school budgets. This 
inflation also impacts our families from the grocer to the gas station. One of our most 
significant operating costs each year is fuel oil, natural gas, and diesel. Our diesel 
prices are up 35% this year alone, and our natural gas prices have increased nearly 
50%. While our worst fears about frigid temperatures this winter have not yet fully 
materialized, there is plenty of winter that remains, and market instability to match.  
Between our three districts, our buses roll almost 800,000 miles annually, and our 
fleet of vans and small vehicles transport homeless students over 1,200 miles each 
day from Kittery to Lewison. The average age of our 11 school buildings is 48 years, 
with the oldest built before World War I.  In spite of our many energy upgrades, and 
the pride that we take in maintaining our facilities and fleet, we and scores of other 
districts in every corner of this state would benefit tremendously from this additional 
emergency support.  We anticipate that everyone from teachers to taxpayers will hail 
this legislation and its local impact, and we strongly urge the committee to endorse it. 
I am available to field any questions that the Committee may have, otherwise, on 
behalf of our three communities I wish to thank you for your time and service to our 
state.
Respectfully, 
Meg Parkhurst
Assistant Superintendent, Saco School Department
