1» 
. 
, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES .»_. v _ .L. 
-J I 3%‘I
‘ 
, .51 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Daniel J_ Ankeles TTY2 MAINE RELAY 711 
7 Beech Drive 
Brunswick, ME 04011 
Dan1el.Ankeles@legislature.maine.gov 
Cell Phone: (207) 756-3793 
Tuesday, February 14, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Dan Ankeles 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Presenting LD 274, An Act Regarding Municipal Costs for Water Used for Firefighting 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and honorable members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am Representative Dan 
Ankeles, and I serve House District 100, a central slice of Brunswick that includes our downtown, Mere 
Point, Bowdoin College, the former naval airbase and Mere Point. I am the sponsor of LD 274, An Act 
Regarding Municipal Costs for Water Used for Fireﬁghting, and it is my honor to present it to you for 
the purpose of giving it a quick, painless and humane death. 
But, before you commend this bill to that great law libraiy in the sky, I want to explain for the record why 
we are at this point and how this bill has already managed — in its own way - to accomplish some good for 
our constituents. 
The point of LD 274 was to address rising hydrant fees that ﬁre departments - usually through their 
town’s general fund - pay to water districts each year. Maine’s Public Utilities Commission sets the fee 
range and tells water districts they can charge the ﬁre department up to a certain percentage of the 
district ’s annual revenue. 
Well, in my community, the water district built a brand new and quite expensive facility. The district 
borrowed money to pay for it and raised its rates to cover the costs of the debt service. The higher rates 
brought in more revenue, which in turn caused signiﬁcant spikes in Brunswick ’s hydrant fees two years in 
a row. 
This was a frustrating experience for those of us serving in local government, and I tried to come up with 
a way to prevent further harm to property taxpayers without shifting those same costs right back to rate 
payers. 
LD 2'74 attempted to thread this needle by channeling the costs through a third party - the homeowner ’s 
insurance market. That’s why this bill is in front of you instead of in front of BUT. As I soon found out, 
the insurance mechanism was wildly off the mark, and I began to get phone calls from confused 
stakeholders on all sides of the issue. 
In fact, the bill turned out to be so ill conceived that I think it may have scared the water districts and ﬁre 
safety ofﬁcials into setting up their ﬁrst formal meeting on hydrant fees and sprinkler fees in years. The 
PUC even agreed just this past Friday to facilitate and host the meeting. Based on my conversations, I’m 
District l00: Brunswick (part)
sure this would have happened eventually no matter what, but it’s good to know just how effective an 
accelerant clumsy legislating can be. 
And I have to joke that as a rookie lawmaker, I’m tempted to draw all the wrong conclusions from this 
experience. 
But in all seriousness, it speaks incredibly well of this state, that every last stakeholder I spoke with was 
kind and generous with their knowledge and experience. I want to thank each of them for braving this 
little scare and for using LD 274 as an opportunity to come to the table and try to improve this little 
corner of Maine’s public policy world. If and when they come back with recommendations, I’m sure this 
Legislature will give them due consideration. 
And so with that, the circular ﬁle awaits. I am happy to attempt to answer questions, and I want to thank 
the members of this committee for your patience and for the opportunity to testify.
