 
 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Sen.  Joseph Baldacci , Senate Chair  
Rep. Michele Meyer , House Chair  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Health and Human Services  
Committee  
 
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary organization 
dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a 
world of longer, healthier lives. We are writing i n support  of LD#199, "An Act to Improve the 
Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program .” The American 
Heart Association has a proud history of working to improve health care  and to ensure that 
adequate, accessible and affordable health care is available  for everyone . 
 
Everyone should have comprehensive, understandable , and affordable health coverage .  
Everyone should receive high -quality, affordable, patient -centered health care.  Everyone 
should have access to evidence -based preventive services at minimal cost. We believe that all 
Maine people, no matter where they come from, should have access to affordable health care 
and should be able to see a doctor when  they need to  and limiting access because of 
immigration status can harm our community health and workforce.  We know that Mainers 
want more healthcare,  in 2017, Mainers overwhelmingly voted to expand MaineCare, and 
today it provides coverage for more than 106,000 people and was critically important for public 
health over the last few years.  I n the past, the Maine legislature was unified in providing health 
care to all low -income residents, including immigrants. However, in 2011, the LePage 
Administrat ion cut access to MaineCare for many immigrants. In 2021, Governor Mills and the  
Maine legislature passed a budget with strong bipartisan support, providing income -eligible 
pregnant people and children under 21 access to MaineCare, regardless of immigratio n status. 
LD 199 will remove those exclusions for adults.  
 
We know that when we ignore health care needs today, people face preventable illness and 
unnecessary suffering , and it increases health care costs for our whole health care system. 
MaineCare for everyone with low income, including immigrants, will make us all healthier and 
stronger.  Without health coverage, many low -income immigrants must wait until a condition 
becomes an emergency to get care – endangering their health and putting added stress on our 
overburdened emergency departments.  Children’s access to health care improves when their 
parents have health care coverage. Children’s physical, mental, and emotiona l health are 
impacted by the wellbeing of their caretakers –whole families need care to thrive! Immigrants 
are leaders in our communities, schools, workplaces, and governments, helping to build a 
brighter future for us all. Healthier employees are more able  to meet the demands of their job 
and spend less time out of work. The overall costs of missed work days, lower output, and 
disability far outweigh the direct costs of medical care. Access to health care also means less 
hunger, fewer evictions, and stronge r financial futures. Maine’s economic future depends on 

 
attracting a skilled workforce to the state, and Maine’s immigrants are an important part of 
that future.  
 
LD 199 would help Maine address inequity and racial disparities. An important step in reduci ng 
health disparities is to ensure all low -income Mainers, including immigrants, have access to 
preventive care, prescription drugs, care for chronic conditions, and mental and behavioral 
health care. Maine experienced some of the worst racial and ethnic d isparities for COVID -19 in 
the nation. Lack of access to basic health care to treat and prevent underlying health conditions 
made our low -income communities of color, many of whom were immigrants in frontline jobs, 
more vulnerable to the virus. LD199 conti nues Maine’s work of improving access to health care 
that started with Medicaid expansion, making our healthcare system more equitable and our 
workforce more resilient. We ask you to vote “ought to pass” on LD#199. I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have about this testimony.  
 
Sincerely  
Allyson Perron Drag   
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director      
 
