 
State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Ann Tucker  on behalf of Greater Portland Health  
March 28 , 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 199, “An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the 
MaineCare Program ” 
 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Ann Tucker  and I serve as the Chief Executive Officer  at 
Greater Portland Health.   Greater Portland Health is one of Maine’s 20 community health 
centers (CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), and part of the 
largest independent primary care network in the state.  
I strongly support  LD 199 and thank Speaker Talbot Ross for bringing legislation forward  that 
will ensure all Maine residents with low income have access to MaineCare, regardless of  
immigration status .  
 
It is important for th e health of our low-income communi ty members to be el igible for  
MaineCare, regardless of immigration status , as it would contribute to healthier community 
members.  It would  expand the  medical services available  to our low -income community 
members.  Without access to insurance, residents have to make d ifficult and stressful decisions 
relate d to their health .  One example is t he cost of expens ive prescription medications and 
without insurance , a Maine resident  may not be ab le to afford them which leads t o incr ease d 
emergency  room utilization  and hospital stays for ch ronic con ditions that could be contro lled 
with medication.   Offering  MaineCare, regardless of immigration status,  would allow access to 
preventative care  sooner which in turn should  reduce o verall  emergency  medical expenses.   .  
Health y community members are able to work and positiv ely impact the state ’s workforce 
short age. All Maine residents deserve to h ave access to healthcare . 
 
On behalf of Greater Portland Health thank you for considering our comments. Please do not 
hesitate to contact me directly at  atucker @greaterportlandhealth.org  with any follow up 
questions.  
 
 
 
 
 
