1 
 
 
131st  Legislature  
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 29 
 
    
Senator Anne Carney  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
Office (207) 287 -1515  
 
 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney in support of  
LD 199, An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing 
Exclusions to the MaineCare Program  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
March 28, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Heal th and 
Human Services Committee, I am Anne Carney, proudly representing Senate 
District 29, which includes South Portland, Cape Elizabeth and part of 
Scarborough. Today I am pleased to speak in support of LD 199, An Act to 
Improve the Health of Maine Resid ents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare 
Program. This legislation will remove barriers to public insurance coverage and 
help Maine immigrants get necessary preventative health care and seek treatment 
when they are sick.  
 
I am usually before this commi ttee to advocate for maternal and child health 
legislation. And while there are many reasons why we should include all income -
eligible Mainers in MaineCare, I want to focus specifically on Maine families. 
When you consider the impact on Maine families that  have one or more immigrant 
parents, it is easy to appreciate the importance of LD 199 and providing 
MaineCare to immigrants who are income eligible.  
 
First, look at what immigrants pay in state and federal taxes. Mainers who are 
immigrants contribute hund reds of millions of dollars each year to state and federal 
revenue. A report from the American Immigration Council  shows that in 2018 , 
Maine families headed by an immigrant parent paid  $437.7 million in federal taxes 
and $193.9 million in state and local taxes. I encourage you to list en to the Mainers  
providing testimony today regarding their work and their contribution of taxes.  
 
Second, look at what families gain by having MaineCare coverage. When parents 
have health insurance, their children are more likely to be insured and to rece ive 
2 
 medical care. Research, like this report from the Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities , conclusively shows that children in a household who are eligible for 
Medicaid are more likely to be insured when their parents gain coverage. In 
contrast,  “among citizen children, those with at least one noncitizen parent were 
significantly more likel y to be uninsured than those with citizen parents. ” Kaiser 
Family Foundation , Health Coverage and Care of Immigrants , Dec. 20, 2022.  
 
Equally important, research shows that expansion of Medicaid for adults with low -
income increases by 29% the likelihood that their children will receive important 
annual well -child care: “Medicaid expansions targeted at low -income adults are 
associated with increased receipt of recommended pediatric prev entive care for 
their children. This finding reveals an important spillover effect of parental 
insurance coverage that should be considered in future policy decisions 
surrounding adult Medicaid eligibility.” See abstract, Spillover Effects of Adult 
Medicaid Expansions on Children’s Use of Preventive Services , Pediatrics,  
December 2017 . 
 
Third, consider the importance of parents having access to primary care. Currently 
parents who are ineligible for MaineCare  because of their immigration status are 
less likely to have a primary care provider or to have visited a doctor in the past 12 
months , and more likely to have gone without needed medical care in the past 12 
months due to cost . KFF. Moms cannot get mammograms or pap smears. Dads 
cannot get treatment for high blood pressure. These are common preventative 
treatments that anyone with a primary care provider receives to maintain good 
health, to prevent serious disease, and to make sure parents are able to support their 
children  now and in the future.   
 
This lack of access to care exists despite the fact that , nationally,  these parents are 
“contributing billions of dollars in insurance premiums and taxes, [and] they 
help subsidize  the U.S. health care system and offset the costs of care incurred by 
U.S.-born citizens.” Id. 
 
Thank you for your consideration today. I am happy to answer any questions you 
might have.  
 
 
Anne C arney  
State Senator, Senate District 29  
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough  
  

