up COMMUNITY CLINICAL 
1' SERVICES INC. 
FQHC ~ Federally Qualified Health Center 
Aﬁlllated with St. Marys Health System 
State of Maine I 131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Coleen Elias on behalf of Community Clinical Services 
March 28, 2023 
Supporting: 
LD 199, “An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the 
MaineCare Program” 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Coleen Elias, CEO of Community Clinical Services - one of 
Maine’s 20 community health centers (CHCs), also known as Federally Qualiﬁed Health Centers 
(F QHCS), and part of the largest independent primary care network in the state. 
Community Clinical Services has a total of 9 service sites in Lewiston and Auburn, including 4 
school-based health centers, primary care, integrated and outpatient behavioral health services 
and a pediatric dental clinic. Our healthcare team of 125 individuals deliver comprehensive care 
to more than 13,000 patients annually, regardless of health insurance status or ability to pay. 
We strongly support LD 199 and thank Speaker Talbot Ross for bringing legislation forward that 
will ensure all Maine residents with low income have access to MaineCare, regardless of 
immigration status. 
By regulatory compliance and virtue of ethical standards of practice, Community Health 
Centers are at the forefront of providing equitable access to care. We make it our mission to 
mitigate barriers that cause hann, delay care, and result in poorer outcomes for the most 
marginalized in our communities. 
Health equity is at the core root of this bill and is one of the reasons why I am here today, 
speaking in support of this important legislation. The CDC deﬁnes Health Equity as “the state 
in which everyone has a fair and just opportunity to attain the highest level of health”. 
Everyone means all, with no exclusions - not just folks that have a social security number; not 
just pregnant women and children that have coverage with an expiration date. Everyone 
means all. 
Since October, our health center has served approximately 300 new patients that are newly 
arrived in the community that do not have insurance. In fact, they have nothing more than 
what they could walk here with, and hope for their futures. They face insurmountable 
challenges and come to us seeking care, knowing we won’t turn them away. Pregnant Women 
with hi gh-risk pregnancies that need care beyond the date they deliver, children of all ages 
with health and developmental disorders that need care beyond their 21$‘ birthday, men and 
Women that are currently not eligible, but need care to manage their latent tuberculosis, 
hypertension, hepatitis, diabetes, HIV. Some are extremely healthy, some are not. Some need 
only an annual exam, While others need care to stabilize their acute needs, or to effectively
manage their chronic needs. Healthcare isn’t a luxury, but a basic necessity of life, and all 
low-income Mainers need and deserve equitable access to care and the “opportunity to attain 
the highest level of health”. 
The second reason why I am here today, in support of LD199, is to talk about the impact of 
this bill for our health center, and community health centers across the state that are providing 
care to all who seek our services. We do this not only because we are federally required to do 
so, but because it’s the right thing to do. However, providing care without funding for that 
care doesn’t come without signiﬁcant ﬁnancial challenges that threaten to create the very 
barriers we work so hard to tear down. 
Exclusions on MaineCare beneﬁts based on immigration status not only harms the individuals 
that are excluded, but it also negatively impacts the health centers that are providing care for 
free. This bill will help all health centers by providing reimbursement for the care being 
provided to members of our community - reimbursement that will directly support our 
operations and ensure that we can keep our lights on, and doors open so that we may continue 
providing workforce opportunities here in our community while continuing to provide high 
quality, culturally appropriate, affordable, and cost-effective care to all, Without exclusion. 
The ﬁnal reason why I am here today, in support of LD 199, is because it’s an important 
investment to make in Maine residents that are, very often, only in need of temporary support 
as they legally work through the immigration process. Immigrants signiﬁcantly contribute to 
Maine’s economy, and we need Immigrants to want to stay in our communities and to work in 
Maine Based businesses, but they need to be healthy to do so. Studies conﬁrm that health 
coverage improves access to care; supports positive health outcomes, including an individual ’s 
sense of their own health and well-being; incentivizes appropriate use of health care resources; 
and reduces ﬁnancial strain on individuals, families, and communities. (1) 
You all have an important choice to make on this bill. A choice that will have immediate and 
long-term impact on the lives of low-income Mainers that already face health disparities, on 
health centers throughout the state, and on the state’s workforce. How you vote on this bill 
will determine whether that impact is positive or negative. 
In closing, I ask you to please take a moment to reﬂect on the following question posed by Dr. 
Paul Edward Farmer, a pioneering Harvard Medical School global health physician and medical 
anthropologist who dedicated his life to improving and providing health care in underserved 
communities: 
“If healthcare is a human right, then who is considered human enough to have that right?” 
LD199 is an opportunity to answer this question through legislative action. 
On behalf of Community Clinical Services, thank you for taking time to hear our testimony in 
support of LD 199. 
(1): Antonisse, Larisa, et al., “The Effects of Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: Updated Findings ﬁoma 
Literature Review,” Kaiser Family Foundation, August 2019.
