MAI NE 
MO H lz"npmvingtl'1e health status oi Maine's seasonal werlterr; and their 
RAM families by providing tulturally appropriate care and s<;er\/§¢;:e:;. 
State of Maine I 131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Hannah Miller on behalf of Maine Mobile Health Program 
March 28, 2023 
Supporting: 
LD 199, "An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents 
by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program" 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services, thank you for the opportunity to speak today. My name 
is Hannah Miller and I am the Director of Outreach at Maine Mobile Health Program. 
We are a federally qualified health center with a specialty focus on Maine’s 
farmworkers, seafood processors, and their families. We offer medical, behavioral health, 
and nursing care through our mobile units, referrals to dental, vision, and specialty care, 
pharmacy assistance, and care coordination. We are part of a network of community 
health centers that operate in rural and under~resourced communities in Maine and 
believe that expanding access to primary health care must be a priority. 
Our patients are vital members of Maine' s economy - although many are not originally 
from Maine, they are the backbone of Maine’ s food industries. We support access to 
healthcare for broccoli and potato workers in Aroostook county, blueberry and wreath 
workers in Hancock and Washington counties, dairy workers in I-{ennebec and 
Somerset counties, apple workers in Androscoggin and l-{ennebec counties, and 
aquaculture and seafood processors all along the coast from York to Washington 
county. We are here today because active participation in primary care, including 
preventative care, helps support peoples overall health and wellbeing. It allows them to 
continue Working and contributing to their communities. We support LD 199 because 
all Maine residents deserve access to healthcare, regardless of class or immigration 
status. Whether they were born here or moved here, people in every corner of Maine 
deserve reliable and accessible healthcare without fear of financial burden.
1 
MameMoblle_0rg 
V 9 Green Street } P0 ox 405 I Augusta, Mame 04332 | |nfooMa|neMob|le org 
Phone (207) 622 9252 I Toll Free (888) 351 9634 I Fax (207) 626 7612
MAI NE 
MO H l¥¥i}?§’£T)'\i§!'ig the iiealili asizmss of ?~’;2iine’s S€21$9iié1lW0i ’l’(€%fS and their 
families by ‘§3i'{)“=Jl(7lii1g ctiliurziliy appropriate care and sec'~/lam. 
I vividly remember Working with a patient who struggled to decide if she could go to 
the emergency room because she feared receiving a big bill. Despite struggling to 
breathe, she questioned if she could afford the higher level of care she really needed. 
Fear of oppressive financial consequences, for both emergency and routine care, isa 
concern I witness again and again. Expanding MaineCare coverage to include everyone 
would reduce stress related to cost and allow people to take better care of their 
health. They could manage their chronic conditions and routine healthcare needs 
through primary care settings and use emergency care only when needed. 
Health centers are a vital part of Maine’ s healthcare network, especially in our rural 
communities. Reimbursements from MaineCare would allow health centers like ours to 
directly reinvest that money into providing better services for all our patients and 
increase outreach to people not yet established with our health centers. It would allow 
for better sustainability and resiliency. 
On behalf of Maine Mobile Health Program, thank you for considering our comments. 
Please feel welcome to contact me directly with any follow—up questions. 
Sincerely, 
Hannah Miller 
Director of Outreach 
Maine Mobile Health Program 
207-441-1633 
hmiller@mainemobile.org
2 
Ma§neM0bi ‘e_org 
k 9 Green Street 1 PO Box 405 ] Augusta, Maine 04332 I lnf0@MaineMobile.org 
Phone (207) 622 9252 I Toll Free (ass) 351 9634 1 Fax (207) 626 1612
