\ * Maine‘ l iimary Care 
Association 
State of Maine I 131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association 
March 28 2023I 
Supporting: 
LD 199, ."An Act to improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare 
Program" 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, lam Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA). 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). Maine's CHCs make up the largest 
independent primary care network in the state, providing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6 Mainers) at 
more than 70 service delivery sites in all 16 Maine counties. 
W tr I rtLD199 dth kS k TlbtR f b I lti f dtht e s ong ysuppo an an pea er a o oss or ringing egis a‘ 
on orwar a 
will ensure all Maine residents with low income have access to MaineCare, regardless of immigration 
status. Members of our communities deserve full health insurance provided by the MaineCare 
program. 
Community Health Centers were born out ofthe Civil Rights Movement and a need to provide access 
points to health and social services for medically under~served and disenfranchised populations. We are 
deeply committed to continuing that mission of promoting greater health equity for all people. Today, 
CHCs in Maine are on the frontlines of providing health care to some of our most vulnerable and 
neglected populations 
Community Health Centers are required to provide this care without regard to or patient's insurance 
status or ability to pay-which is a mandate unlike any other primary care provider. Ensuring that the 
patients they serve have access to MaineCare coverage allows our primary care providers to fully 
utilize the wraparound services that are necessary for the overall health of the whole person. Being 
able to bill for these services is critical for the financial health of the health centers as well, as they 
continue to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and are dealing with inflationary wage pressures 
and increasing costs of care. Without reimbursement for these visits, it is becoming increasingly 
harder for health centers to keep their doors open and uphold their mandate and commitment to 
provide high quality and equitable care for their communities. 
On behalf of Maine's Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@megca.org with any follow up questions. 
Hannah A. Hudson, MAl 
Policy and Communications Manager 
Maine Primary Care Association
