' Mailing: PO Box 437 
W M a I n e e n r fgr Street: 1Weston Court, Suite 103 
I n Augusta, ME 04332 
mecep.org Economic Policy 
Testimony in support of LD 199, "An Act to improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the 
MaineCare Program"i 
March 28, 2023 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Sen/ices. My name is James Myall. l'm an Economic Policy Analyst for the Maine Center on Economic Policy. l’m 
here before you today to testify in support of LD 199, ”An Act to improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing 
Exclusions to the MaineCare Program." 
All Mainers need access to affordable health care, no matter where they were born or how they came to our state. This 
bill would provide critical support for many New Mainers as they begin a life in this country, making them healthier and 
more economically secure, and in the process bolstering our economy and helping us all thrive. 
LD 199 would ensure that certain groups of immigrants who are currently excluded from Medicaid by federal law are 
covered through state funds. This use of state funds is not only a moral imperative, but also a smart choice which will 
benefit us all in the long-term. The Legislature recognized that in the last budget cycle when it ensured that all children 
and pregnant people would be covered, regardless of their immigration status. It's time to finish the job and make sure 
no-one is left behind. 
Being without health care coverage is an extremely difficult experience and puts people in the impossible decision of 
trying to choose between paying for their health and other necessities like groceries or rent. This is especially true of the 
most vulnerable Mainers who are already trying to make do with very little resources. And while people may have 
access to emergency MaineCare or free care through a hospital system, those safety nets do not cover many 
fundamental health care costs like preventative care, check-ups, tests, or prescription drugs. ln the past decade, a huge 
body of research has shown that expanded access to Medicaid for low-income individuals in dozens of states has 
resulted in overall better health. Researchers have found that Medicaid coverage has resulted in fewer deaths from 
diseases like cancer, heart disease and liver disease. lt has meant better treatment for conditions like diabetes. lt's also 
resulted in more access to mental health and substance use treatment, as well as preventative services like reproductive 
health.‘ 
We also know that this initiative will benefit those of us who aren't directly impacted. From a public health standpoint, 
the COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced how much our healthiness is connected to the wellbeing of others. Making sure 
that everyone has access to testing, vaccination, and treatment will reduce the circulation of COVlD-19 and other 
infectious diseases in the community at large. 
Health care is also an economic issue. Not only does having access to affordable health care mean these Mainers will be 
better off individually, their economic security will benefit all of us. For example, it's far more cost-effective to provide 
MaineCare coverage to individuals so that they can get regular diagnostic and preventative care, than it is for them to 
rely on emergency and charitable care. Again, Maine's experience with broader Medicaid expansion has shown this- 
— UW Board of Directors* 
Earbara Burt,#C‘ hair T wk 
Sandra Butler gglcy Mitchell V1“ 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
hospital costs for charitable care and uncollectable debts have both fallen as a result of more people having access to 
MaineCare. 
Healthy Mainers are also productive Mainers. By assisting these New Mainers with access to health care, we will be 
ensuring that they are able to contribute to our collective well-being to their fullest extent, whether that's through 
working, or through equally valuable unpaid activities like volunteering and caring.’ Poor health is a leading cause of 
Mainers not being able to work or to working less than full time, and access to health care is an economic imperative. 
And New Mainers are especially likely to work in key sectors of Maine's economy such as in tourism, at hospitals, and in 
direct care work. 
And where Mainers are able to work, they contribute additional tax revenues. A relatively small state investment now 
will be more than repaid over the lifetime earnings of these Mainers. Overall, immigrants currently contribute nearly 
$200 million in state and local taxes in Maine each year? 
This bill would correct an injustice. It would ensure that health care is available to Mainers regardless of where they 
were born or how they came to this country. lt will help the economic security of hundreds, improving their health and 
their lives more broadly. What's more, it will improve the health and economy of our society as a whole. It represents 
both the morally right thing to do and a smart use of state tax dollars. l urge you to vote ”ought to pass." 
Thank you. l'll be happy to take any questions. 
Notes 
1 
For a review of the hundreds of studies on this topic, see Madeleine Guth, Rachel Garfield, and Robin Rudowitz, ”The Effects of 
Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: Studies from January 2014 to January 2020." Kaiser Family Foundation, Mar 17, 2020. 
https:1/www.kff.org/medicaid/report/the»effects-of-medlcaid-expansion-under-the-aca-updated-flndings —from—a-literature-review[ 
and Madeline Guth and Meghana Ammula, "Building on the Evidence Base: Studies on the Effects of Medicaid Expansion, February 
2020 to March 2021." Kaiser Family Foundation. May 6, 2021. httpszﬂwww.kff.0rg/report-section/building-on-the-evidence-base- 
studies-on-the-effects —of-medicaid-expansion-february-2020-to-march-2021-reportj 
2 For an example, see Thomas Buchmueller, Helen Levy and Robert Valletta, "Medicaid Expansion And The Unemployed," National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 26553. https:ﬂwww.nber.org[§_ystem/files/working_papers/w26553/w26553.pdf 
3 
MECEP calculation using US Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2017-2021, 5-year data. See also 
https:[/maineequaliustice.org/site/assets/flles/3397/Id 199 2023 fact sheet.pdf
