  
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
 
In Favor of LD 199 – An Act to Improve the Health 
of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the 
MaineCare Program 
 
Submitted on March 28, 2023 
 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee.  
My name is Jena Jones, and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 199. 
At the MCOA, when we advocate for our collective ability to age positively with autonomy and 
security, we mean everyone in Maine, including those who have immigrated to our great state. 
Crucial to that ability is access to quality healthcare services when and where they are needed. In 
the past, this was common practice but cuts in 2011 saw this coverage severely decreased and as a 
result many New Mainers lost access to affordable care.   
Immigrants are tax-paying workers who contribute hundreds of millions of dollars in state and 
local taxes annually1, playing pivotal roles in driving our workforce and our economy. According 
to the American Immigration Council, Maine’s growing immigrant population includes around 
30,000 workers as of 2018, many working in healthcare support positions2. This means that 
supporting the health of New Mainers supports growing a direct care workforce in dire need of 
assistance.  
A healthy workforce is a productive one, and access to healthcare coverage ensures that all 
Mainers can obtain the health services they need. However, when denied access to coverage, many 
people wait until an illness or injury negatively impacts their daily lives before seeking the most 
expensive care in an emergency department. These late-stage access points are costly to our 
systems and further stress our workforce challenges.  
The Governor’s Biennial Budget has offered additional support to provide access to healthcare by 
offering coverage to income-eligible pregnant people and children under 21 years of age regardless 
 
1 (American Immigration Council, 2020)  
2 Ibid 

of immigration status, however this neglects many older New Mainers who also require access to 
services. The passage of LD 199 would close those gaps.  
The process of expanding MaineCare services is already well underway and supported by Mainers, 
who turned out in 2017 to vote in favor of expansion. Not only is the increase in coverage right for 
the wellbeing of all Mainers, regardless of immigration status, it is ultimately a method to control 
surging costs in healthcare spending. 
When we ensure access to necessary healthcare services, we simultaneously decrease health 
disparities across our state which will have positive effects on our already stressed system3. When 
people have access to routine healthcare, we see earlier diagnoses for conditions such as diabetes, 
heart disease, and cancer in addition to better overall management of chronic conditions.  
This bill provides necessary support for those in need and it helps strengthen Maine’s economy by 
aiding our workforce and decreasing healthcare spending. I urge this Committee to support the 
efforts to LD 199 to ensure all Mainers, regardless of immigration status, have access to quality, 
affordable healthcare services.  
Thank you.  
Jena Jones 
 
3 (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, n.d.)  
