---A 
MAINE BUSll\lESS 
l/vi. M i G F3 /\’f l O N C C) A l. l T l Q i\l 
Testimony of Joby Thoyalil, Maine Business Immigration Coalition 
In Support of LD I99, An Act to lmprove the Health of Maine Residents by 
Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program 
March 28, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the joint standing 
committee on Health and Human Services. My name is joby Thoyalil and l am testifying on 
behalf of the Maine Business Immigration Coalition (MeBlC) in strong support of LD I99 - An 
Act to lmprove the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare 
Program. 
MeBlC is Maine' s only resource dedicated to providing information, education and advocacy on 
immigration and related issues from the business and economic perspective. ln 202l, nearly l0O 
Maine businesses, chambers of commerce, trade associations, and higher education institutions 
signed the Maine Compact on lmmigrationl urging state leaders to “adopt policies and practices 
to help Maine become a destination of choice for immigrants to the U.S. and that provide an 
environment where immigrants can reach their full potential in our state." LD l99 clearly 
represents such a policy. 
Maine is the nation's oldest state. With our low birth rates, Maine had the dubious distinction 
of being projected to hit the tipping point of more people being over age 65 than under age I8, 
a full l5 years ahead of the rest of New England? lmmigrants have been key to stemming our 
population decline over the past few decades and their contributions to our workforce and 
economy have been vital. lmmigrants in Maine earn an estimated $l.6 billion in household 
income and contribute $44l million in federal, state, and local taxes} immigrant workers are 
disproportionately represented in essential jobs, including working in food processing, 
agriculture, grocery stores, and providing health and home care services. Despite their 
contributions to our local and state economies as workers, consumers, and taxpayers, too 
many are excluded from the social safety net the rest of us depend on should we fall on hard 
times. 
' 
https://www.mecompact.org/ 
2https://www.bostonfed.orglpublications/new-england-public-policy-center-regional-briefs/20 l 9/aging-and-declining 
populations-in-northern-new-englandaspx 
3 
https://map.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/locations/maine/ 
jfhoyolil@c1 mericonbicbiz, www.mo|inebic.org
When Congress decided to remake the federal welfare system in I996, it did so largely on the 
backs of immigrants. A majority of the financial savings of federal welfare reform was 
accomplished by taking benefits away from immigrants. 
Since then, permanent residents who have had their "green cards" for less than five years are 
ineligible for most federal public benefits, as are asylum seekers, those with Temporary 
Protected Status who have been living here legally - in most cases for two decades or more, 
those with DACA who came to the U.S. as children, spouses, and children of U.S. citizens who 
are in the process of applying for residency, and myriad other categories of immigrants. Despite 
working and paying taxes, federal law prohibits these and other immigrants from accessing most 
public benefits. 
Maine has fortunately decided to cover some of these people, including children, people with 
disabilities, and pregnant people. But many of Maine's immigrants ineligible under federal public 
benefits eligibility law remain left out. 
Many immigrants work in full-time jobs that don’t provide health insurance and don’t pay 
enough to lift them out of poverty. As a result, when ill, many delay or avoid care because they 
fear they will be unable to pay the medical costs. Expanding l"laineCare to all income-eligible 
immigrants will help Maine' s immigrants get health care sooner, to prevent or catch illness 
before it becomes more serious, more devastating to them and their families, and more costly 
to treat. Expanded l"laineCare will lead to healthier families and communities in general, and to 
a healthier workforce. 
I urge you to pass LD I99 because it is both the right thing to do for those who are currently 
left behind, but also because it is an investment in our future workforce and economy.
2 
jfhoyo lil@omerico nl:>i<:.biz, www.mciinebic.org
