 
 
 
Testimony  in support of LD 199: An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by 
Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program  
 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services , my name is Dr. Julia Oppenheimer and I live in Portland, Maine.  I 
am a resident physician training in pediatrics. I represent the Maine Chapter of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, and thus, represent a large network of pediatricians across the state of 
Maine. We stand in support of  LD 199, because  we feel passionately that  all Mainers, 
regardless of age, income, or immigration status, deserve equitable access to healthcare.  
 I feel proud  and privileged to care for  a population of primarily New Mainer families. These 
families  arrive in Maine, often  following arduous and dangerous journey s, hoping for  a better life 
for themselves and their children. They have had to make the incredibly difficult decision to 
leave most of  their possessions, their livelihoods, their culture and traditions , their extended 
families  – and sometimes , their eldest children  – behind, all to escape political corruption and 
unrest and seek safety in the U.S.  I met one family during their toddler’s initial intake 
appointment, who told me that they knew they had to leave their home country when they woke 
up one night to bandits holding them at gunpoint. They fled that evening and made much of the 
journey through Central America on foot. They had additional encounters with bandits who took 
their remaining possessions  along the way . Their child developed asthma during this journey 
and was briefly hospitalized in Mexico. They spent a few days in a detention center in Texas, 
and upon release someone bought them tickets to travel to Maine.  
 They arrived with no means . Despite  finding shelter at a local hotel and establishing with basic 
community services , they still had to ration food. They had no transportation and had to walk 
several miles in freezing temperatures to the grocery store. Their child was hospitalized again 
for asthma and  was started on a daily inhaler. She needed to see a pulmonologist and establish 
care within our clinic. The family had no health insurance at this time . We spent a majority of the 
visit focused on how to pay for healthcare costs  and other basic  needs , which meant less time 
to talk about her asthma  and preventative healthcare.  Fortunately , my patient was  ultimately  
able to qualify for health insurance through  MaineCare.  But many low -income adults have been 
excluded from  recent  expansions to MaineCare , solely because of their immigration status.  
Even with free care programs offered through hospital systems , patients who do not qualify for 
MaineCare are often unable to afford prescription drugs
1. I worry that some families may not 
seek care due to  the prohibitive cost and lack of access to affordable insurance.  
 
 
1 Snider, Ari. “ State lawmakers consider removing immigration status as a barrier to MaineCare.” Maine 
Public . 2023, March 15. www.mainepublic.org  

 
 
Immigrant families are crucially important to our industry and culture here in Maine. According to 
the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition, immigrants make up about 3% of Maine’s total 
population, and ~4% of workers in Maine’s labor force2. Although Portland and Cumberland 
County have the largest population of immigrants, Androscoggin, Aroostook, Kennebec, Penobscot, and York Counties also have significant populations
3. 41% of immigrants in Maine 
have a bachelor’s  degree or higher3. They  provide essential labor in some of Maine’s most  
important  industries , including seafood, agriculture, hospitality, and healthcare.   They make up 
more than 2% of self -employed business owners in Maine and  make ~$48 million in annual 
revenue2. According to Maine Equal Justice, immigrants pay at least $193.9 million in Maine 
state and local taxes each year4. They have overcome remarkable adversity  and deserve 
equitable access to healthcare. They deserve the comfort of knowing that if they get sick , they 
will not have to choose between their basic needs and their medications or hospital bills1.  
 Maine immigrants  also deserve equitable access to preventative health  care and mental health 
care to build heal thy lifestyles  and reduce illness. As physicians, we know that health prevention 
leads to better health outcomes for  individual  patients  as well as healthier communities . We also 
recognize that prevent ative healthcare reduces emergency department visits, hospitalizations, 
and exorbitant healthcare costs down the road. We can do better for our patients.  One individual 
who immigrated to Maine said of healthcare access in the 2022 State of Maine Community 
Health Needs Ass essment report, “ “[We need] access to proper health care and it should be 
affordable. It makes them feel like you won’t survive in America if you don’t have money to pay 
for healthcare”
3. 
 
We urge you to stand with us to ensure that all Mainers, regardless  of age, income, or 
immigration status , receive equitable healthcare coverage. A  vote for LD 199 is a vote to 
improve the health of our communities and workforce.  
 Thank you.  
 
2 Maine Immigrant Rights Coalition, www.maineimmigrantrights.org   
3 State of Maine Community Health Needs Assessment Report , 2022. www.maine.gov   
4 Maine Equal Justice, www.maineequaljustice.org  
