FRANNIE PEABO E let 
Cornprehenslve HIV 8: M138 Servlcrs 
March 28, 2023_ 
' 
Testimony of Katie Rutherford, Executive Director of Frannie Peabody Center 
In support of LD 199 - An Act to [mprove the Health of Maine Residents by 
Removing Exclusions to the lVlaii1'eCare Program 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
SenatorBaldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
My name is Katie Rutherford and I am testifying on behalf of Frannie Peabody Center, Maine’s largest 
HIV/AIDS services organization, in support of LD 199 as it improves the health of Maine residents. 
Frannie Peabody Center is the state’s largest community-based provider of comprehensive services for 
people living with HIV/AIDS in Maine through medical case management, behavioral health counseling, 
housing assistance, as Well as low-barrier, free HIV and Hepatitis C testing. I am here today, not to 
discuss what could or should be possible when insurance gaps are removed, but to tell you that We see the 
positive outcomes of this access every day. Consider us a pilot program with over 30 years of experience 
and evidence to support this proposal. iA 
As an agency, we are able to see things from a unique perspective as we administer federal programs that 
extend healthcare coverage to people regardless of immigration status for individuals living With 
HIV/AIDS. These national programs came into existence as a result of the broad acknowledgement that 
liealtliczlre coverage is key to achieving health and financial stability. When clients come to us with acute 
medical needs and numerous barriers, our ability to link them to a form of insurance is a catalyst to 
establishing stability and having the physical health and capacity to Work on housing and employment 
goals. These are absolutely the building blocks to financial independence. 
Alexandra, for example, had experienced severe trauma and escaped persecution in her home country. 
She arrived in Maine with intense chronic medical complications and was staying in a motel with her four 
children and no income. We immediately connectedherto a form of health insurance and linked her to 
providers. She quickly became healthy enough to search for housing, gained the physical strength to take 
care of her children, and took the necessary steps to obtain steady employment. She then became eligible 
for health insurance through her Workplace, and began earning more than what would have made her 
income eligible for MaineCare. That initial coverage made all this possible. Without it, she would have 
had insurmountable emergency costs, unattainable life-saving medications, and the cycle of poverty and 
ongoing health risk would have continued for Alexandra and her children. For Alexandra, her eligibility 
was directly related to her HIV status, but her story is similar to so many individuals without access to 
affordable care. Opening the door to health coverage by removing exclusions to the MaineCare Pro gram 
is what is best for the health, well-being and success of our communities." 
I urge you to support LD 199 to close these gaps in coverage and ensure all Mainers have access to the 
care they need through the MaineCare Program. . 
30 l)an_l11rth St. Finite .il)9. l’t)!li2lnti, ivlainc ()4 llll > tycabodyccultzriorg
