MAINE 
M0 H irnproving the health status oi‘ Maine's seasonal workers anti their 
families by providing culturally appropriate care and services. 
State of Maine I 131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Laura Valencia Orozco on behalf of Maine Mobile Health Program 
March 28, 2023 
Supporting: 
LD 199, "An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents 
by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program" 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Laura Valencia Orozco, and I am the Director of 
Behavioral Health at the Maine Mobile Health Program, a Federally Qualified Health Center 
that provides services to farmworkers and seafood processors and their families in Maine. At 
MMHP we welcome each of our patients regardless of their ability to pay or where they come 
from because we strongly believe that healthcare is a human right and immigration status 
has nothing to do with it. 
As a behavioral health provider, I need to make appropriate referrals to other providers to 
support patients ’ overall health. If I am working with a patient who is covered MaineCare, I 
can make these referrals confidently knowing that this will not create a debilitating financial 
burden for them. However, that is not an option for a lot of our patients. In those cases, we 
have to watch our patients make the difficult choice between racking up high medical bills or 
only seeking care in dire emergencies. 
In 2021, we had a patient from Central Maine working in agriculture get very sick with 
COVID-19. The patient worked seven days a week throughout the pandemic, had no sick time, 
and was the sole earner for a family of six. Because the patient had no MaineCare, the family 
had to make the difficult decision to wait and seek care until the patient was not able to 
breathe and had to be intubated. 
When the patient was discharged, they immediately went back to work. In the meantime, the 
family had to suffer great financial stress and food insecurity, all while racking upa 
staggering medical bill. Now in our weekly sessions, the patient often talks about this medical 
bill and how they'll never be able to pay it off and the fear of the negative impact it will have 
on their family. They describe how hard it is to sleep or focus and feel successful at work 
because of the continuous medical bills they receive. 
Mainemobileorg 
‘ 9 Green Street I PO Box 405 I Augusta, Maine 04332 I lnfo@MaineMobile.org 
Phone (207) 622 9252 I Toll Free I888) 35l 9634 I Fax (207) 626 7612
MAI NE 
MO H imgi§'o\iii'ag the health status of Maine's seas01ialwsrI~;e: ‘s zmtl their 
ieirnilies by providing mllturaily appropriate care am} :5!\;3r“/§(i{A/BAA 
During the pandemic, many of us had the opportunity to work remotely, get unemployment 
benefits, or get hazard pay, while most of our patients and other frontline workers had to 
continue working in hazardous conditions, upholding Maine’ s agricultural and seafood 
industries and ensuring that we had fresh food on our tables. It is now our time to show up for 
them by passing LD199. 
It’ s inhumane that people are excluded from MaineCare, and I see the additional costs it 
creates for our health care system too. The amount of time we spend seeking out financial 
assistance takes away from the time We could be providing the behavioral health treatment 
we are trained and hired to do. Watching people choose between their life and staggering 
medical bills takes a significant toll on us as providers and contributes to high burn 
out. Passing LD 199 would not only help individual Mainers or their families, it would help our 
health care system and our Workforce. This bill represents a better and more fair future for us 
all. 
As a provider from the Maine Mobile Health Program, thank you for considering my 
comments. Please do not hesitate to contact me directly with any fol1ow—up questions. 
Sincerely, 
Laura Valencia Orozco 
Director of Behavioral Health 
Maine Mobile Health Program 
207-446-0556 
lvalenciaorozco@mainemobile.org 
9 Green Street l PO Box 405 l Augusta, Maine 04332 l lnfo@MaineMobile.org 
Phone (207) 622 9252 l TO“ Free (888) 351 9634 I Fax (207) 626 7612 MaineMobile.org
l
