 
 
March 28, 2023  
 
Testimony  of the Immigrant Legal Advocacy Project  
 In Support of LD 199, "An Act to Improve the Health of Maine 
Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program"  
 
The Immigrant Legal Advocacy Project (ILAP) is Maine’s only statewide immigration legal services 
organization, providing critical legal assistance to low -income people who would not otherwise be able 
to afford an attorney. ILAP serves people in need of humanitarian protection including survivors of 
crimes and trafficking, asylum seekers, and vulnerable immigrant children.  Through our wor k serving 
immigrant communities across  Maine, ILAP  sees firsthand  the impact that lack of access to healthcare 
has on vulnerable individuals  and families and in turn , our whole state.  
 ILAP applauded the expansion of MaineCare to cover  children and pregnant people regardless of 
immigration status . We ask the Health and Human Services Committee  to support LD 199 , 
which  takes the next step in improving public health in Maine by  expand ing access to all  low-income 
people, regardless of immigration status.  
 
We know that access to healthcare helps people live longer and healthier lives, keeps families secure and 
stabilized, and helps our communities and economies thrive.
1 The COVID pandemic has made that  even 
more clear. Across our nation, a study estimate d that at least 340,000 lives would have been saved 
during the pandemic  had people had access to healthcare.2 Undocumented people – who are majority 
people of color – suffered and died disproportionately during the pandemic.3 In addition to irreplaceable 
human lives, studies showed that  a lack of access to healthcare led to massive and unnecessary costs  to 
taxpayers and our economy -  more than $105 billion in hospitalization costs from COVID could have 
been saved.4  
 
While there are multiple barriers to vulnerable immigrant populations in Maine and across the country 
in accessing both preventative and life -saving medical car e, studi es show that lack of access to healthcare 
is at the top  of the list .5 This vital legislation would not only expand access to those without a pathway 
to immigration status in our communities, but would also help those who could become eligible  but face 
obstacles and backlogs in our immigration system that leave them in limbo.  
 
 
1 Uneven access to health services drives life expectancy gaps, World Health Organization ( April 2019),  https://www.who.int/news/item/04 -04-
2019-uneven -access -to-health -services -drives -life-expectancy- gaps-who; Jacqueline Howard , US spends most on health care but has worst 
health outcomes among high -income countries, new report finds, CNN (Jan. 31, 2023), https://www.cnn.com/2023/01/31/health/us -health -care-
spending -global -perspective/index.html .  
2 Rachel Nuwer, Universal Health Car e Could Have Saved More Than 330,000 U.S. Lives during COVID, Scientific American, 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/ article/universal -health -care-could -have-saved -more -than-330-000-u-s-lives-during -covid/ .  
3 Mohammad Tawhidul Hasan Bhuiyan, Irtesam Mahmud Khan, Sheikh Saifur Rahman Jony , Renee Robinson,  Uyen -Sa D. T. Nguyen,  David 
Keellings,  M. Sohel Rahman,  and Ubydul Haque, The Disproportionate Impact of COVID -19 among Undocumented Immigrants and Racial 
Minorities in the US, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public He alth (Dec. 2021),  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8656825/ .  
4 Rachel Nuwer, Universal Health Care Could Have Saved More Than 330,000 U.S. Lives during COVID, Scientific American, 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/universal- health -care-could -have-saved-more -than-330-000-u-s-lives-during -covid/ .  
5 Paulette Cha, Health Care Access among California’s Farmworkers, Public Policy Institute of California  (April 2022), 
https://www.ppic.org/publication/health -care-access -among -californias -farmworkers/ .  

For many years, Congress h as failed to pass meaningful immigration reform that would provide  green 
cards  and citizenship  to people who call Maine  home, raise their families, volunteer,  contribute to our 
communities, and play key roles in our workforce and economy. Those categorically excluded from 
access to MaineCare include people brought to the U.S. by their parents when they were infants and 
children, those who m the federal government has granted temporary humanitarian protect ion, 
farmworkers, and many others. Th ose currently facing serious medical conditions who are 
excluded from access to MaineCare include a current ILAP client who escaped the war in 
Ukraine and is in need of  dialysis .  
 
Importantly, LD 199 also addresses the lack of access to healthcare for those who may technically have 
a pathway to an immigration status under which they would qualify for MaineCare, but face barriers and 
obstacles in our deeply inaccessible and backlogged U.S. immigration system . For example, MaineCare 
covers those who have already been granted asylum, but not those navigating the system.  
   
In our outreach events, ILAP frequently encounter s asylum seekers who ask us “ how am I 
supposed to pay for healthcare when I’m not allowed to work? ” Under current federal law, asylum 
seekers are not allowed to apply for a work permit until approximately six months after  they file an 
asylum application. Applying for asylum in  and of  itself is a deeply complex and bureaucratic process and 
there are not enough qualified immigration attorneys in Maine to assist. If a person is able to successfully apply for asylum, they may face many years of backlogs. The result is that already- vulnerable people are 
forced to try to cope with untreated medical conditions until they eventually become emergencies.  
LD 199 addresses th e compounding issues that immigrants face, making eligibility for MaineCare based 
on income and need, not on immigration status.  
 
In our work serving those who need humanitarian protection in the United States, ILAP  also 
encounters  people in Maine who face serious medical issues related to  the persecution and 
violence th at forced them from their homes . One of our clients, a survivor of torture, suffers 
from serious mental health issues as a result. As our attorney has worked to serv e our client, multiple 
healthcare professionals have said  that someone in this situation would normally be referred for 
residential care , but lack of health insurance makes that impossible. Lack of healthcare also leaves our 
client with gaps in access to medications . Because of the inability for our client to receive the health care 
she needs, she has been unable to  put forth her best case  in the immigration system  and faces risk of 
deportation to the country she fled from.  
 
LD 199 would help to immediate ly and meaningfully address the public health crisis of vulnerable and 
marginalized people not having access to the medical care we all need to be healthy and prevent disease . 
The overwhelming majority of Mainers agree.
6 We urge you to support this legisl ation to help address 
health disparities , ensure parents are well to care for their children, and save Maine from needless costs 
related to lack of healthcare coverage , so that we can all individually and collectively thrive. 
 
6 Dan Neumann, Poll: Most Mainers think access to affordable healthcare for everyone should be a priority, Beacon (March 13, 20 23), 
https://mainebeacon.com/poll -most-mainers -think-access -to-affordable -health -care-for-everyone -should -be-a-priority/ .  
