T 
All/‘onceH 
' 
!~'£L*i; . 
'" 
Officers" 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care'
“ 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"¢' Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP lnc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
" 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFl North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mentai Health Services, Maine 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
I ; The unified voice for Maine's communiry behavioral health providers 
Testimony in Support of LD 199 . 
An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing 
Exclusions to the MaineCare Program" 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
March 28, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine's community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 199, ”An Act 
to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the 
MaineCare Program." This bill provides MaineCare program coverage for 
noncitizen residents of this State 21 years of age or older with qualifying low 
incomes who are ineligible for federal Medicaid due to immigration status. 
MaineCare should cover everyone with low income - no exceptions, no 
exclusions. All Means All. However, many Mainers are unjustly excluded from 
MaineCare due to their immigration status and must choose between their health 
and other basic needs like food and shelter. All means All. 
I'd also like to focus on Maine's workforce. We can all agree that Maine's 
economic future depends on attracting a skilled workforce to the state, and 
Maine's immigrants are an important part of that future. We know that access 
to health care also means access to behavioral health care. Immigrants have often 
experienced unspeakable trauma. But their experiences do not need to block 
them from leading healthy successful lives. When we can ensure people get the 
mental health supports they need, we ensure their access to a stronger financial 
future - for themselves and their children. 
We also know that healthy children need healthy parents - both physically and 
emotionally. Access to MaineCare-covered behavioral health treatment is vitally 
important for the health of a family. All means All. No one is immune to 
behavioral health challenges. 
l thank you for your time today and l urge members to vote ought to pass on this 
important proposal. A vote for this proposal is a vote for healthy families. And it's 
a vote that shows you also believe that All means All. Happy to answer any 
questions you have for me. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 '" 
Phone 207.621.8118 " Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
