Malvina Gregory
Portland
LD 199
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Malvina Gregory, I 
live in Portland and I writing to testify in favor of LD 199.
When I first met my husband fourteen years ago he was undocumented, and had been 
for the past 6 years. He worked two jobs--as a line cook and a janitor. One day he 
developed a cough that he just couldn't shake off. It's hard to be sick when you don't 
get PTO and work seven days a week. He kept working. The cough kept him up at 
night. And then after over two sleepless weeks of coughing, his lungs began to 
wheeze and rattle at night. I am a medical Interpreter. I know that untreated 
pneumonia can be dangerous. We didn't know what to do.
I'm lucky. We know someone who's a doctor. We called for advice, and they arrived 
at our house stethoscope in hand for a home visit. They listened to his lungs, took his 
vital signs, and tentatively diganosed my husband as having walking pneumonia. 
Definite diagnosis would have required an ER trip costing over a thousand dollars and
a $500 sputum test, they said. They wrote us a simple prescription for antibiotics. I 
am thankful for the privilege that gave me friends with prescription pads; thankful for 
a friend who saw the spirit of medical treatment not the letters defined by insurance 
companies and took the risk of writing that prescription; thankful that my husband got
better. It could have been so much worse.
I worked for years as a medical Interpreter, and before that as a social worker with the
homeless. I have seen many undocumented patients who have arrived for urgent care 
with aggravated symptoms because they were scared to get treatment. So many 
preventable infections swollen to dramatic proportions, and chronic illnesses that had 
spiraled out of control. My patients were scared of medical bills, scared of admitting 
they didn't have papers. I have seen how these patients later had to apply for freecare 
because they couldn't pay the bills that came, and the hospital was forced to assume 
the expense. We all pay one way or another, and the human cost along the way 
because people don't have preventative care is heartbreaking.
I urge you to help care for ALL the residents of our state--documented and 
undocumented, yound and old and everyone in between. If the COVID-19 pandemic 
has shown us anything, it is that we only have healthy communities when all of us 
have good, reliable access to preventative care. Like my husband, undocumented 
immigrants the hidden wheels of our economy. Supporting LD 199 and guaranteeing 
health care for everyone irrespective of immigration status is not only the morally 
wise thing to do, it is the foundation of a stable economy.
