1
March 28, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:
My name is Melissa Martin, and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine Coalition 
Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine’s sexual 
violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine’s Children’s Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers 
in your communities. 
I am submitting testimony in support of LD 199, “An Act to Improve the Health of Maine 
Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare Program”.  Thank you for Speaker Talbot 
Ross; Senator Carney; Representatives Dhalac, Gattine, Meyer, Rana, and Zager; and Senators 
Ingwersen and Rotundo for sponsoring this bill.  
I am here to share just one of the many important perspectives as to why accessing Mainecare is 
important regardless of immigration status.  
Approximately 14,000 Mainers each year experience sexual violence.  However, certain 
populations are at even greater risk of experiencing sexual violence such as those with 
developmental disabilities, Trans Mainers, and, important to this bill, those without immigration 
status. 
In addition to being more vulnerable to sexual violence, those without immigration status are 
even less likely to report to law enforcement, and sexual violence is already reported to law 
enforcement at low rates by all of those who experience it.  This means access to medical care is 
extremely important for safety and well-being, and may be the only path those without 
immigration status who experience sexual violence have to connect with other support services, 
such as our sexual assault support centers.  
2Each year, the Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault conducts a Needs Assessment to assess the 
priority areas for survivors of sexual violence.  This year, the overwhelming central need for 
sexual violence survivors in Maine was basic needs.  This bill would help provide the incredibly 
important need of medical care to all sexual assault survivors living in Maine.  In addition, 
preventing survivors from incurring medical debt when they are uninsured can have the 
additional benefit of protecting their access to other basic needs such as housing.  
We urge you to support LD 199 and would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
About Maine’s Sexual Assault Service Providers 
 
One in five Mainers will experience sexual assault at some point in their lifetime.1 Each year, 
14,000 Mainers will experience sexual violence.2
Maine’s sexual violence service providers provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in-person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
school- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
regardless of when they experienced sexual violence, and regardless of what type of sexual 
violence they experienced. Types of sexual violence include, but are not limited to, sexual 
harassment and gender-based bullying, child sexual abuse, elder sexual abuse, stalking, sex 
trafficking, and sexual violence within an intimate partner relationship.    
 
24/7 Confidential 
Maine Sexual Assault Helpline:  1-800-871-7741
 
 
1 Dumont, R. & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public policy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern Maine.
2 Ibid.
3
4

5

