Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Honorable members of 
the joint standing committee. My name is Milagros Sanchez, and I have been living in 
Maine on and off for the past three years. 
My sister has lived in Maine for many years, and at the start of COVID-19 we wanted to 
come to Maine to be close to family. We came to Maine seeking a place to call home 
that was peaceful and where we could access critical medical sen/ices. My son has 
cerebral palsy, and he needs to be able to access services, treatment and medication 
on a regular basis. 
Luckily, we found the sen/ices that he needed here at Central Maine Medical center. We 
were relieved, because our son had been suffering severe flare ups with his condition, 
since he had gone without treatment at the start of the pandemic. He was able to get 
the life saving treatment he needed. Unfortunately, later we received bills for hundreds 
of thousands of dollars. I am sick over how we will be able to pay those bills. 
People with special needs shouldn’t have to make the decision between life saving 
treatment and a place to live or food to eat. I have dedicated my life to my son, and his 
wellness and ability to thrive in a world that is not always set up to support him is whatI 
spend most of my time fighting for. 
We would like to make Maine our home, and invest in this community. I am an educator 
and a psychologist, and would like to be able to bring my skills to enrich the lives of 
students here in Maine. Unfortunately, because of the ability to afford medical care, 
we’ve had to leave at times and consider other places to live. This is stressful and unfair 
for my family, and especially for my sign. I do not want him to have to worry about my 
stress, and I don’t want him to feel that he is a burden to me, our family, or this system. 
Social safety nets are designed to support people who need it the most, and I just want 
my son to be able to access the care that he deserves. 
I see lots of people struggling here who have been living and contributing to Maine for 
decades. I am shocked that they work so hard to support the Maine economy, and that 
they cannot benefit from the same basic sen/ices that others are able to access. 
All we want is the dignity and fairness of the same treatment as any other resident of Maine. 
The time to restore MaineCare coverage for all is now. Thank you for your time.
