Nadi Kaonga
Portland
LD 199
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Dr Nadi Nina 
Kaonga, I live in Portland, Maine and I am testifying in favor of LD 199. I am a 
physician and I am an immigrant. As we know, health is a human right, and in the 
United States, our health system puts individuals without insurance at-risk and at 
great disadvantage. One such population are refugees/asylum seekers, also referred to 
as “New Mainers.” Since health is a human right, we absolutely need to extend health 
insurance coverage to all New Mainers so they can readily access health services. As 
an obstetrician and gynecologist in Maine, I frequently encounter situations where 
patients are not eligible for MaineCare, or in the case of postpartum women, their 
MaineCare coverage eventually expires, and as such, they then have to make difficult 
decisions when it comes to their health versus livelihood for themselves and their 
families. Too frequently, I have patients deciding between medications or food, 
transportation and childcare because they do not have health insurance to cover the 
cost of their medications. I also have patients who request deferring preventive health 
measures and/or treatment due to an inability to afford their care. No one should ever 
have to make those difficult decisions, especially if we have the capacity to expand 
health insurance coverage to all. Furthermore, we know that people with health 
insurance coverage are more likely to seek out and obtain preventive health services 
and are more likely to be retained in care. Ultimately, health outcomes are improved 
with health insurance outcomes. Therefore, Maine can and should set an example to 
the rest of the United States and expand MaineCare coverage to all regardless of 
immigration status. Let’s uphold health as a human right, let’s keep our community – 
all of the people who comprise our community – as healthy as possible. This can be 
achieved by approving LD199. Thank you for your time and consideration. –Dr Nadi
