Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Patty Kidder 
and I live in Springvale, located in the City of Sanford.
I am a long-time active member of the Sanford Unitarian Universalist Church, 
MUUSAN (Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network) and Maine 
People’s Alliance (MPA). Unitarian Universalists (UUs) believe in the inherent 
worth and dignity of every human being and in justice, equity, and compassion in
human relations. Because of my strong belief in these basic principles, I believe 
health care is a human right and we need to do whatever we can to ensure all 
Mainers have access to health care.
I am asking you to please support and fund Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross’ bill, LD
199, “An Act To Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage 
Gaps in MaineCare and the Children’s Health Insurance Program”. I have seen 
how having MaineCare health insurance saved the life of my childhood 
sweetheart. He qualified for and received MaineCare immediately after 
Governor Janet Mills signed Medicaid Expansion into Law. Soon afterwards he 
was diagnosed with cancer. He was able to access the health care he needed to
survive and recover. He is now cancer free but how many people are waiting for 
you to give them the health insurance they need? How many have suffered 
needlessly because of the coverage gaps in both MaineCare and the Children’s 
Health Insurance Program (CHIP)? Access to affordable health care saves lives 
and making it available to all Maine residents, regardless of their immigration 
status, is the right thing to do.
Another dear disabled friend found herself needing a liver transplant because of 
having Hepititis C from a blood transfusion when her son was born before 
screening blood was routine. It was undiagnosed for 30+ years and the damage 
was done to her liver. The specialist wouldn’t even consider her for a transplant 
until she had health insurance. Fortunately I was able to help her get the 
insurance she needed so desparately through the ACA Marketplace in time to 
get the surgery she needed to survive. She recently had her 4th year anniversary
of her transplant and she is doing great enjoying her life. Without health 
insurance, she would have died in the fall of 2018.
People’s lives are in your hands so I am asking you to please support  LD 199, 
“An Act To Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in
MaineCare and the Children’s Health Insurance Program”. Please vote “Ought 
to Pass” and know that you will be saving lives and it is the right thing to do.
Thank you for your time and I will do my best to answer any questions.
Patricia E. Kidder
4 Carpenter Street
Springvale, ME 04083-1109
207-977-3325
