122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  In Support of : 
LD 199: An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare 
Program  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Room 209, Cross State Office Building Tuesday , March 28 , 2023 
 Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public  Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  This bill would provide  MaineCare coverage for noncitizen residents of Maine who are 21  years of age or older 
with qualifying low incomes who are ineligible for coverage under  the federal Medicaid program due to their 
immigration status . 
 The p rovisions in this bill align with Healthy People 2030
, an initiative of the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, which sets data- driven, national objectives to improve health and well -being over the next 
decade. One of the 2030 goals  is to improve health  by increasing medical, dental, and prescription drug 
insurance coverage. According to H ealthy P eople  2030, people without insurance are less likely to get the 
health care services and medications they need and more likely to have poor health outcomes. Rac ial and ethnic 
minorities, people with less education, and people with low incomes are more likely to be uninsured. Strategies 
to increase insurance coverage rates are critical for en suring more people get the health care services and 
medications they need . 
 Every year, more than 100,000 additional lives could be saved if more people received recommended preventive care,
1 with lack of health insurance being a leading contributing factor to not receiving such care. In 
fact, preventive health services – such  as cancer screenings, tobacco cessation interventions, and vaccinations – 
can help prevent 9 of the top 10 leading causes of death.2 Additionally , according to t he Commonwealth Fund , 
our current system of publicly supported co verage options for pregnant and postpartum women is a complex 
patchwork that varies tremendously by income, immigration status, and state, leaving many new mothers uninsured. The United States is experiencing a maternal morbidity and mortality crisis. Each year, an estimated 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  700 womena in the United States die from pregnancy- related causes, and many more experience severe maternal 
morbidity.3 Moreover, there are wide racial and ethnic disparities in maternal outcomes, with Black and 
American Indian/Alaska Native women experiencing much higher rates of pregnancy -related mortality and 
morbidity than other groups.4 Expansion of coverage will promote continuity and access to care.  
 
Indeed , there is a consistent, positive relationship between health insurance coverage and health -related 
outcomes across a body of studies that use a variety of data sources and different analytic approaches. The best evidence suggests that health insurance is associated with more appropriate use of health care services and better health ou tcomes  for adults .
5 
 Immigrants are leaders in our communities, schools, workplaces, and governments, helping to build a brighter future for all of us. In 2016, immigrants contributed $62 million in state and local taxes
, and on average, 
immigrants who come to Maine are more likely to have advanced education and start businesses  in Maine, 
creating or helping to retain thousands of jobs. They also work in farming, custodial services , construction, and 
other physically demanding, lower paying, yet essential positions. Expanding health coverage to these populations improves health outcomes for already vulnerable populations, reduces health disparities, and contributes to a stronger, more robust economy. These provisions have become even more important during the COVID- 19 pandemic, which has laid bare the inequities facing minority populations. Racial and ethnic 
minorities experience a greater disease burden, including being more likely to have a chronic health condition, not have health insurance, and work in professions that increase their risk of contracting the virus.  
 MPHA supports  legislation that improves health equity and reduces health disparities among underserved 
populations . This bill will increase the number of people with health coverage by improving a n insurance 
system that can perpetuate disparities through restrictions; but which also has capacity and potential to improve health outcomes through expansion. This bill improves public health , and w e are in strong support . We 
respectfully request you to vote LD 199  “Ought to Pass.” Thank you for your consideration.  
         
 
1National Commission on Prevention Priorities. Preventive care: A  national profile on use, disparities, and health benefits. 2007.  
2Fox JB, Shaw FE. Clinical p reventive services coverage and the Affordable Care Act. Am J Public Health . 2015;105(1):e7- e10. 
3U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Severe Maternal Morbidity in the United States , updated Jan. 31, 2020;  U.S. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “ Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System ,” updated Nov.  25, 2020; and Callaghan  WM, 
Creanga AA, and Kuklina  EV, “Severe Maternal Morbidity Among Delivery and Postpartum Hospitalizations i n the United States ,” 
Obstetrics and Gynecology  120(5) (Nov. 2012): 1029 –36; MacDorman MF, et al., “ Is the United States Maternal Mortality Rate 
Increas ing? Disentangling Trends from Measurement Issues ,” Obstetrics and Gynecology  128(3) (Sept. 2016): 447– 55; and Petersen 
EE, et al., “ Vital Signs: Pregna ncy-Related Deaths, United States, 2011 –2015, and Strategies for Prevention, 13 States, 2013 –2017 ,” 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report  68(18) (May 10, 2019): 423– 29. 
4Creanga AA, et al., “ Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Severe Maternal Morbidity: A Multistate Analysis, 2008 –2010 ,” American 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology  210(5) (May 2014): 435 e1– e8; and Petersen EE, et al., “Vital Signs,” 2019.  
5Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Consequences of Uninsurance. Care without coverage: Too little, too late . Washington 
(DC): National Academies Press (US); 2002. 3, Effects of H ealth Insurance on Health.  
 
aThe Commonwealth Fund uses “women” and “mothers” to describe people who are pregnant or recently gave birth. The Fund uses 
these terms to align with the language in the Social Security Act, which defines Medicaid eligibility for pregnant and postpartum 
women. However, The Fund acknowledges that not all people who become pregnant or give birth identify as women.  
