Senator Baldacci,  Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, 
My name is Sarah Harden, I live in Portland and am here today to testify in favor of LD 199. I 
am a licensed clinical social worker based in Cumberland County and serving other counties of 
Maine through telehealth. I have twelve years experience working for Latinx families. I will testify 
this afternoon to the ways LD 199 will strengthen our communities across the state by providing 
greater access to mental healthcare for immigrants. It is essential because:
*Everyone deserves the benefit of healing both their body and mind. Immigrants 
obtain mental healthcare a lot less; one of the main reasons is the lack of access to health insurance. 
In my practice, we have to cobble together resources to make affordable and holistic mental 
healthcare a reality for low-income and immigrant families. But there can be delays, which are costly 
when there is a crisis and someone needs life-saving interventions. Throughout the pandemic and 
from the safety of my own home and computer, I have conducted therapy sessions with clients 
labeled “essential workers'' who labored every day through fear and stress, worried they were going 
to contract COVID in their factory or seafood processing jobs. They witnessed co-workers losing their 
lives or losing their housing, all the while not being able to care for their physical health due to a lack 
of access to healthcare.  More than just working bodies, they merit the opportunities other Mainers 
have for treating this trauma. I personally do not know where I would be today without having had 
access to mental health resources. 
Mainers with immigration histories contribute so much to our state- they are leaders and 
changemakers, spiritual healers, teachers and farmworkers. Many have endured psychological 
trauma, either in their home country or as a result of immigration-related stressors. Mental health 
care addresses these wounds and supports immigrant families settling into new communities and 
strengthens their ability to more fully contribute and enjoy their lives. 
Additionally, without health insurance, you don’t have much of a choice of provider. People 
benefit from finding the right clinician to offer them culturally and linguistically appropriate crisis 
and long-term therapy. These and other services may mitigate immediate safety risks and support 
them over time. Getting the best care is about creating a good fit by building a trusting relationship 
which allows people to feel safe in asking for and getting the help they need. Having insurance opens 
the door to this level of care. 
*Providing access to mental healthcare is good for everyone. The ability to resource 
mental health providers means the use of fewer emergency services, healthier families and 
communities, and a stronger workforce. Untreated mental health can lead to unnecessary disability, 
unemployment, poor physical health outcomes later in life,  suicide, and poor quality of life, while 
emotional support strengthens healthy families and relationships and produces a healthy society. 
The economic cost of untreated mental illness is estimated at more than 100 billion dollars each year 
in the United States. ( NAMI, 2020)  The ways we care for each other says much about the kind of 
society we wish to live in. 
 LD 199 is life-affirming legislation that would make the difference between creatively finding 
loopholes in our current system of care so that someone might gain access to the care they need, and 
leading with best practices in the state of Maine. It is the distinction between a healthcare system 
that can only offer short-term emergency mental healthcare and providing holistic, consistent care 
and connection for safer and stronger communities. Thank you. 
