lVlaineHealtl1 
Local Health Systems 
Franklin Community 
Hcaltli Network 
Lincolnlienltli 
Mninel lealth Care At liome 
Maine Behuviorzll l-lealtliczwe 
l\/lemorial Hospital 
Maine Medical Center 
l\*lid C0218!‘-P21fl(\ ’it3\V Ilcnlth 
N0rDX 
Pen Bay l\'ledicnl Center 
Southern Maine Health Cure 
VV:1lclo County General Hospital 
\/Vestcrn Maine Health 
Part of the 
Nlaincflcalth Family 
M'.iineHcnltl1 r\ccountuble 
Care Orgzinization 
lVl2llﬂCI'ICi1ltll Afliliatcs 
l\’l11lll€(lCI'lt‘.1'1ll Health 
New Eng]-.1ncl Rehabilitation 
llospitul of Portland 
St. i\'lury' s l-lenlth System l\/lainel-Iealth 
Testimony of Silas Zechman, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 199, “An Act to Improve the Health of 
Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the MaineCare 
Program” 
Tuesday, March 28, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Silas 
Zechman, Program Supervisor for CarePartners Plus, a program of 
MaineHealth, and I am here today to testify in support of LD 199, “An Act 
to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Removing Exclusions to the 
MaineCare Program. ” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-proﬁt health care system that provides 
the full continuum of health care services to the residents of eleven 
counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire. As part of our mission of 
“Working Together So Maine’s Communities are the Healthiest in 
America, ” MaineHealth ’s members are committed to providing access to 
health care services for all patients regardless of their ability to pay or 
immigration status. We also provide free care to those at or below 200% 
of the federal poverty level, above and beyond the state requirement of 
l 50%. 
Although charity care provides a safety net, providing access to care is not 
enough to overcome all of the barriers faced by our uninsured patients. 
With that said, through MaineHealth ’s nationally-recognized Access to 
Care programs, hundreds of thousands of Maine people have received 
high-quality care, improved their health status, received free and reduced- 
price medications, reduced unnecessary emergency department visits, and 
learned how to successfully navigate the complexities of the health care 
system. 
While MaineHealth health systems and clinics do not inquire a patient’s 
immigration status, our providers come to know their patients and their 
personal stories. In caring for New Mainers, we are frequently confronted 
with situations in which a patient’s health is signiﬁcantly impacted by 
being uninsured. 
In preparation for this hearing, our care team members shared: 
v Dr. Ben Felix at Maine Medical Partners shared the story of a man 
in his 50s who immigrated to the United States from Angola in an 
attempt to ﬂee violence in his home country. He arrived in Maine 
ll0 Free Street ' I)()l'ili\l'l(l, i\"IE 04101 Phone: 207—(i(>l—7(lOl Fax: 207-661-7029 mLlll1€ll€llfl1 org
by walking from Brazil to California, and along the way, he experienced unimaginable 
hardships including the unexpected death of his wife. The patient had multiple medical 
conditions that had been untreated during his trip including hypertension and diabetes. 
Given his lack of health insurance and access to primary care, he was treated in the 
Emergency Department several times for these chronic conditions before establishing 
care in our primary care ofﬁce. During our initial visit, We found that his diabetes was 
uncontrolled but he was unable to afford treatment given that he was uninsured. He also 
was unable to receive important disease preventing vaccines. He was also subsequently 
diagnosed with active tuberculosis, which was most certainly delayed by his lack of 
health insurance and access to health care. This delay in care could have led to the spread 
of this deadly infectious disease. 
0 My colleague at Access to Care shared the story of a woman who walked to the United 
States from Brazil and lost a child along the way. When she arrived here with her 
husband and other children, she did not apply for MaineCare as she was under the 
impression that would affect their application for asylum. She only went to the 
Emergency Department when the pain and bleeding from her miscarriage were too much 
for her to bear. Likewise, she did not bring her kids to see pediatricians, only bringing 
them to the emergency room whenever their temperatures rose to troubling degrees. 
As these stories demonstrate, it is imperative that we extend health care coverage to all people 
living in Maine, regardless of immigration status. Many of our New Mainers have faced 
incredible challenges to reach our state to make a better life for themselves and their family. 
This vulnerable population deserves health care so that they can lead healthy, happy, and 
productive lives. Additionally, the health of our community also beneﬁts by reducing 
unnecessary use of emergency resources, preventing the spread of infectious diseases, and would 
contribute to the overall health and productivity of our community. 
On behalf of the families and communities we serve, we urge the Committee to support LD 199 
to provide MaineCare coverage for ALL people who need it, regardless of immigration status. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions.
