 
 
April 24, 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 1494 : “An Act to Help Address the Worker Shortage in Behavioral Health Care Services by Allowing 
Provisional Licensure and Providing for Reimbursement for Out -of-state Licensees ” – OUGHT TO PASS (Amend ment)     
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Fiancial Services : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on LD 1494 . My name is Chris McLaughlin, and I am a licensed 
clinical social worker with over 2 2 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children and families across 
a variety of treatment settings  here in Maine . I am also humbed to be  the Executive Director of the Maine Ch apter of the 
National Association of Social Workers (NASW -ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to represent the interests of 
Maine’s social workers as they endeavor to meet the behavioral health needs of Maine people across all settings and age s 
from Fort Kent to York  and all places in between . On behalf of o ur over 1000 members here in Maine, I ’m honored to 
share thoughts on this important  proposed legislation.   
 
We are strongly in support of LD 1494 and would ask that it be amended to specifically include social workers and our 
Board of Licensing. As a professional association , we hear often from social workers  who are frustrated with tryin g to get 
their licenses in a timely way after they have just graduated  or they are trying to move here from out of state or qualify to 
work in providing telehealth services from another state. The ability to get a provisional license and begin to prac tice while 
they are waiting for the official process to take place would help us retain more new social workers here in Maine after 
they graduate, and it would assist us in the process of recruiting more social workers to come here from out of state.  
Passage of this bill with the addition of social workers would provide great suppor t to employers across Maine who are 
desperately trying to fill open clinician/therap ist positions yet are unable to hi re new Masters of Social Work graduates 
who are unlicensed and therefore, unable to be reimbur sed by M edicaid, Medicare, or other commercial payors.  It is our 
understanding that, even if all goes  according to plan for new grad uates who are exiting schools of social work across 
Maine and New England, the approximate time from grad uation in the spring  to being granted a Maine social work  license 
is upwards of 4 -5 months.  Again, this assumes that all the necessar y paperwork is done correctly,  and that the licens ee 
passes the national exa m on the first try.  Simply put, most gra duates struggle with remaining unemployed for this long 
after graduation , and this is much too long of a ti me period to expect employe rs to financially float new hire s before they 
are able to produce reven ue for the organization.  
 
The nee d for behavioral health services  in our state  is great, and this is one small and easy way this legislature can support 
the delivery  of this much needed set of services.   I want to  thank you all for your work on this important issue . It’s 
important for me to al so note that prior to my work at NASW -ME, I served on the Maine Board of Social Work Licensure. 
I have incredible respect for the Board staff and want to acknowledge the work they do each day on beha lf of social 
workers in Main e. Our support for this legislation is not intended to be a criticism  of the dedicated team of professionals at 
the Board. Rather, th e passage of this bill would allow Board staff to continue to  do their due diligence  in assuring tha t 
applications are comp lete and managed with appropriate care  while trained and competen t social workers are able to get to 
work  serving the citi zens of Maine i n a seamless  and well supported manner.  Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW 
ME for any support we can offer , including any social work  representation and participation in any future work sessions for 
LD 1494 . 
 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  

