 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Testimony of Emily Ferry  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 25 , 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1494 , “An Act to Help Address the Worker Shortage in Behavioral Health Care Services by Allowing 
Provisional Licensure and Providing for Reimbursement for Out -of-state Licensees ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative  Crafts  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Emily Ferry, Director of Workforce Initiatives at Maine 
Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
Ensur ing access for behavioral health services remains a priority for MPCA and our Community Health 
Center Network . Maine is experiencing acute workforce shortages in many health care professions and 
there is a pronounced  need for more behavioral health professionals , such as LCSWs/LSW -CC, LSWs and 
LCPCs , in our state. CHCs are doing everything they can to ensure that patients receive the quality 
treatment they deserve , but more help is needed  to solve this growing crisis .  
 
We support L D 1494 and thank Representative Crafts and the other co -sponsors for bringing this bill 
forward. Allowing a counseling professional licensed in another state to be granted a provisional license 
for 90 days would  help mitigate  barriers to obtaining licensure and allow for more workers to fill job 
openings throughout Maine.  
 
In April 2023 , there were 29 vacant behavioral health positions across Maine’s CHC Network, which 
includes school -based sites. Our health centers are in dir e need of professionals to fill positions such as 
LCSWs, LCPCs, psychiatric nurse practitioners, psychologists, and substance use disorder (SUD) 
counselors. It is critical that we address issues related to  the recruitment of clinical behavioral health 
prof essionals  to ensure that we are providing the necessary mental and physical health supports for all 
Maine people.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at eferry@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Emily Ferry, MSW  
Director of Workforce Initiatives  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
