I " Officers "' 
Dave Mccluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President
1 ‘a‘ineGeneral Behavioral Heal! 
I Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Cent: 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "’ 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
idroscoggin Home & Healthca' 
Assistance Plus 
‘Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
' 
l 
Genoa Healthcare & 
' 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health' 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
>prtland Recovery Community 
' 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
I. Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
' 
Sweetser 
'iCounty Mental Health Servici 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 1494 
An Act to Help Address the Worker Shortage in Behavioral 
Health Care Services by Allowing Provisional Licensure and 
Providing for Reimbursement for Out-of-state Licensees 
Sponsored by Representative Lydia Crafts 
April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of 
the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. My name is Malory 
Shaughnessy and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine's community based mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies and 
evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of 
our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1494, Arl Act 
to Help Address the Worker Shortage in Behavioral Health Care Services by 
Allowing Provisional Licensure and Providing for Reimbursement for Out-of-state 
Licensees. As committee members, I am sure you have already heard quite often 
that Maine has a severe behavioral health clinical workforce shortage. This 
proposal would go a long way to solving this challenge. 
In our Board meetings at the Alliance, we often discuss the frustration of trying to 
hire clinical staff and get them through the licensing process in a timely way after 
they have just graduated or when they are trying to move here from out of state. 
The ability to get a provisional license to begin to practice while they are waiting 
for the official process to take place would help tremendously. 
Given the complexity of the mental health workforce challenges today, we 
recognize that no single approach will solve this; we need a collective answer, a 
collective vision for the future. We must come together to support as many paths 
as possible to move Maine's behavioral health system forward. 
According to a recent survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation, Maine has 68. 
designated mental health care shortage areas, with nearly 400,000 Mainers 
impacted and, in these areas, less than 20% of the needs are being met.1 
This proposal is a vital piece of any forward-looking strategic plan to address the 
behavioral health clinical workforce shortage in our state. I thank Representative 
Crafts for bringing this proposal forward and urge an ought-to-pass vote by 
committee members. Thank you. 
1 https1//www.kfi.org/other/stateindicator/mentai-health-care-healtnprofessionaI~shortage-areas- 
hpsa5/?curreni:Timeframe=0&sortModei=%7B%22coIId%22:%22Locatlon%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "’ Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' theAllianceMaine.org
'
I
