Paul T. McCarrier - - Monroe, ME 
Testimony on LD 3651 "An Act to Support 
Compliance and Establish Graduated Sanctions 
Under the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act” 
Chairman Hickman, Chairwoman Supica and 
members of the joint standing committee on 
veterans and legal affairs, my name is Paul T. 
McCarrier and I have been a caregiver since 2010. 
I've also worked on legislation since 2010. I own 
and operate a caregiver storefront, I Mill, in Belfast 
which opened in 2018. 
In addition, I was an appointed member of the 
Office of Marijuana Policies Marijuana Working 
Group which met and worked on improving the 
medical cannabis program. 
The need for graduated sanctions is based upon 
business realities. Mistakes happen working in 
complex and unclear regulatory environments. 
Thankfully, OCP has a new director who 
understands this and the department seems more
willing to work with us on clarifying compliance 
requirements. 
All of us pay taxes and some of us pay sales tax. 
The burden of paying both of these makes it 
apparent we need graduated sanctions. lf you make 
a mistake on a filing, does Maine Revenue Services 
revoke your sales license? No. Instead, they offer 
graduated sanctions, which can lead to fines and 
more. l\/lost importantly, they work with you first to 
fix the problem and make sure the state gets their 
taxes. This is how OCP should operate. If there isa 
problem: offer guidance, correction, and then 
warnings. After all this, if a solution is not reached, 
then impose relevant fines etc. 
We are tax paying businesses. We contribute to the 
State Treasury willingly through our monthly salesH 
tax payments. lf the tax department can work with 
us through simple mistakes, we hope OCP can do 
the same. 
Finally, we need to have clarity on what is a violation 
- or, if there is a sanction. OCP has in the past week 
provided us with their compliance check list, which
their investigators use to determine if there isa 
need to escalate to enforcement. 
Without a clear outline of violation tiers, it concerns 
me to think about what could be interpreted to be an 
infraction and to what severity. On top of all the 
other licenses, taxes and regulations we comply 
with, we don't need more anxiety over making sure 
we are in compliance. We hope the legislature can 
offer firm, clear, and fair tiers for us tax paying 
businesses. 
l'm confident with new leadership at OCP we will 
see new cooperation and agreement between stake 
holders and the agency. If this committee and the 
greater legislature endorses this measure, and we 
discover issues with enforcement, fairness or 
compliance, it can addressed during the emergency 
session in 2024. 
Thank you for you're attention to this important 
matter. I will be available for the work session and 
can answer any questions you have.
