122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Support of : 
LD 365: An Act to Support Compliance and Establish Graduated Sanctions Under the Maine Medical 
Use of Cannabis Act  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Friday , March 3, 2023  
 Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health  Association. 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policie s, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we  take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is in support of  LD 3 65: “ An Act to Support Compliance and Establish Graduated Sanctions Under the 
Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act .” This bill directs the Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
to adopt  major substantive rules to develop a graduat ed enforcement plan for violations of the Maine  Medical 
Use of Cannabis Act or rules adopted under the Act  to include a stakeholder  process in the adoption of those 
rules and to make the enforcement plan publicly available . 
 According to a 2022 report
 published by the Office of Cannabis Policy, more than half (54%) of consumers 
who purchase from home -based caregivers do not have a medical card. Si milarly, approximately 1 in 3 
consumers who purchase at medical dispensaries or from caregivers with retail storefronts do not have a medical card (33%).  
 
Given these findings, w e support this bill and its intent to provide additional ove rsight and e nforcement of 
medical cannabis sales.  We believe the pr ovisions of a stakeholder enga gement process and public enforcement 
plan will promote transparency and clarity, and we are supportive  of those inclu sions. Thank you for 
considering our testimony. 
