Roxanne Kai-Petrovich
West Paris Provisions
LD 365
Senator Craig Hickman, House Chair Laura Supica and other distinguished members 
of the committee of Veteran and Legal Affairs. I am speaking today in support of 
LD365 although, with some reservations and concern of OCP guidance and 
bureaucratic power. 
My name is Roxy Kai, I am the Public Relations and Media Manager at West Paris 
Provisions. I am here to speak on behalf of my boss, Andelena Henderson.
Andelena is a Navy Veteran,  who serves our community on the West Paris town 
board, and is the caregiver at West Paris Provisions Medical Dispensary, and this bill 
is personal. 
Does everyone remember the subway 5 dollar foot long song? Here’s your ear worm 
to remember my testimony because West Paris went down over a single 5. 5 dollar. 5 
dollar pre-roll. 
Andelena temporarily Lost her caregivers license over a 5 dollar preroll. a one gram. 
5 dollar. single preroll.  The employees, the majority of which have children, all lost 
temporarily lost their jobs, had to collect unemployment, and be put on Maine care. 
All over a single, 1 gram, 5$ preroll. 
Beyond the employees loosing their jobs, Andelena almost faced homelessness. one 
of offered plea deals was to not be allowed around their cannabis grows or touch 
cannabis for 6 months, her husband also has a caregivers license, but the grow was at 
their home, where was she supposed to go? Live in her van and park at Walmart? 
Gratefully another plea deal was offered that Andelena and her Attorney settled on.
But the biggest kicker is the events that transpired before this punishment that was 
described as “the death penalty for Jay Walking” by her attorney who is an ex state 
trooper. 
This all transpired after WPP had an inspection that ended up with a few things that we were 
given time for to correct and this is where they first learned of the issue with the 5 dollar 
pre-roll; one was a graphic on a sticker that came from an outsourced vender, we were told 
their label sticker wasn't in compliance but because we were selling it, we had to fix it, and 
were made to cover up the graphic, The Vender, whom were friends with, also had an 
inspection with the same Inspector and was told he only had to change the sticker after he 
was out of the approximately 2500 stickers he had but it was ok to use them until they were 
gone. This is a prime example of why we need established guidelines to enforce regulations 
fairly across the board and know what to expect. Let us be clear, it is NOT that we wanted our
friend and fellow cannabis caregiver to get in trouble by any means, just using it as an 
example for why we need this bill - fairness should be expected across the board.
 
Ultimately though, here is the situation that I struggle with the most, WPP was told repeatedly 
that they corrected everything, and were in good standing, but 9 months later with no warning
Andelena's caregivers card was yanked. The charge they stuck her with was the single 5 
dollar pre-roll. 
To paint you the whole picture for context: We had a an employee, whom no longer 
works for us, as part of the consequence that was enforced to correct the mistake. She 
was on register, it was busy that day, and an older man came in, knew her by name 
and had the exact amount of change for exactly one $5 1 gram preroll. He knew our 
establishment, knew exactly what he wanted, acted like regular, and acted as if he was
in a major rush. This is where she messed up, and we acknowledge that a mistake was
made: the mistake was, she didn’t check his ID let him put the money on the counter 
and take the preroll, thinking she was helping him out quickly, as he was in a rush. 
She thought she knew who he was and intended to just look him up in the system and 
complete the transaction without him there as she had been given the exact change. 
Turns out it wasn't who she thought it was, which is why it is important to check all 
IDs, and It turns out this was a sting: The older man was an undercover police officer.
We know that employee and US, West Paris Provisions by proxy, made a mistake and
broke the law, We acknowledge that and agree that we got caught making a mistake 
and should have had some sort of consequence. The employees consequence was 
getting let go of; but, set up to work at a different dispensary, and Andelena, as the 
Caregiver took the brunt of the punishment. However, Andelena wasn’t the only one 
effected by the consequence of this mistake. Multiple Families lost their jobs, started 
collecting unemployment, Andelena's livelihood was taken away from her during the 
time frame her husband was battling stage 4 throat cancer and had no job, they 
weren't even sure if she would wake up one day and he’d be alive or not next to her, 
and this consequence had the unintended affect that caused him to loose his financial 
security for healthcare and treatments for his cancer. 
I ask you does this sound like the consequence was comparable to the crime of a 5 
dollar preroll? Would a fine, and or a mandatory refresher class on rules and 
regulations have been a more appropriate and fitting punishment? 
We made a human error. We are human. Treat us as such and give us grace when you 
do set up the guidelines for a publicly available an known, guided/tiered consequence 
system, that is clearly needed to ensure fair treatment with realistic consequences that 
can be expected to be practiced for all caregivers. Lastly, for us caregivers and 
CGA’s, we are all in this together, let's make sure all of us are treated with dignity 
and the same fairness as on  another. 
Thank you for your time and consideration,
Roxanne Kai
