SAJW-ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@sainofmai11eorg 
WvvW.samila.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1969 
An Act to Expand the Use of Funds to Support Land Conservation 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM-Institute for 
Legislative Action 
Monday, May 22nd, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Rep. Pluecker, members of the Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry Committee, my name is David Trahan and I am representing the 
Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine, Institute for Legislative Action and I am testifying 
in support of LD I969, An Act to Expand the Use of Funds to Support Land 
Conservation.
It is not a well-known fact, but the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine was 
instrumental in the effort that established the LMF program in 1987, so it should be 
no surprise we helped to draft LD I969. The idea for this bill was hatched last 
winter while Tom Abello, Jeff Romano and I were ice ﬁshing on Biscay Pond. 
After years of ﬁghting together with our coalition partners to save and fund the 
LMF program, we decided to work on a policy that would stabilize and build 
predictability into the program’s funding and remove the political bickering of the 
past. From those discussions LD 1969 was born. 
This legislation is designed to mirror the federal Land and Water Conservation 
Fund. If enacted, LMF will be able to accept revenues from a variety of sources, 
including businesses seeking to meet environmental mitigation requirements 
associated with DEP permit applications, general fund dollars appropriated by the 
legislature, investment income, and private contributions. 
The Ll\/1F Trust program will operate like it has in the past, except, now the 
program will retain interest and be able to use these dividends to invest back in the 
program, acquiring conservation and recreation lands, working farms, and working 
waterfronts. In addition, LD l969 empowers the LMF Board to fund infrastructure 
investments on conserved lands such as trails, wildlife habitat, boat access, 
campgrounds, and other ways to get people on the land. 
This legislation accomplishes several worthy goals. It saves money for Maine 
taxpayers by reducing the need to use bond to fund the acquisition of public lands. 
It is also an initial step toward securing more consistent funding, which will instill 
the conﬁdence and stability necessary to achieve multi-year public land purchases. 
SAM has been excited to see the tremendous work IFW has accomplished in recent 
years protecting valuable deer wintering habitat in northern Maine, but this effort is 
far from complete. In the end, LD 1969 will ensure LMF can continue to preserve 
critical deer habitat and provide other conservation beneﬁts for Maine people. 
Thank you to our friends in the Governor ’s Office, Maine Coast Heritage Trust, 
The Nature Conservancy, Maine Audubon, and all the other outdoor partners that 
will help us get this bill across the ﬁnish line. Finally, thank you to Senator Pierce 
and the co-sponsors of LD 1969.
