May 22, 2023 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COI1S€I‘VﬂI1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine' 
Mame kaitlyn.nuzzo(¢Dtnc.org , 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
RE: LD 1969 - An Act to Expand the Use of Funds to Support Land Conservation 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture,Conservation and Forestry, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo andI 
am the.Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine.I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in enthusiastic support of LD 1969 - An Act to 
Expand the Use of Funds to Support Land Conservation. We appreciate Governor 
Mills’ efforts to bring this idea forward and the support of Senator Pierce, Senator 
Black, and Representative Pluecker, along with the other cosponsors. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in l\/laine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
The Land for Maine's Future Prog' am (LMF) has been an effective tool in protecting 
some of Maine's most spectacular places and supporting our natural resource 
economy for over 30 years. During this time, the program has protected a wide variety 
of l\/laine resources including conserving landscapes for recreation and trails, 
protecting access to working waterfronts for fishermen, providing public water access 
to lakes and rivers, and supporting working farmland projects. 
LD 1969 is a legacy opportunity to identify and secure future dedicated revenues for1 
the Land for Maine's Future Program. The bill creates a LMF Trust Fund that will hold 
future and current LMF funds and ensure these dollars are able to generate investment 
incomes to further benefit the goals of the program. Establishing a trust fund would 
allow for new sources of funding to support the program and shift away from the need 
for future bonds. These changes would enormously benefit l\/laine by ensuring 
dedicated funding would be available for these types of projects and eliminating the 
uncertainty of searching for funding every few years when bonds or allocations run out. 
It would allow landowners and project partners time to develop the best projects, 
support staff and program flexibility and creativity, and allow the state to access 
outside federal funds or identify revenue sources. Think about the growth and impact 
the Efficiency Maine Trust Fund has had since it was established in 2002 — this model 
works and would be a huge benefit to our state. 
14 l\/laine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, l\/laine 04011 natureorggmaine
Each LMF project brings together a unique blend of the same formula — a state agency 
sponsor, a willing landowner ready to sell or indefinitely give up development rights, 
community stakeholders, and clear public benefits. As you might imagine, bringing 
these pieces together requires patience and persistence. The best thing we can do to 
support the success of these efforts is build predictability and stability into the process 
Long term funding for the Land for Maine's Future program allows landowners the time 
they need to make decisions, allows state agency partners to plan further in advance 
and prioritize projects as they become ready, and allows community and conservation 
partners more time to pursue match funding. 
At the federal level, Congress recently passed the Great American Outdoors Act. 
Signed by former President Trump, GAOA secured the Land and Water Conservation 
Fund with permanent, dedicated funding. LWCF funds are similar to Ll\/IF and often 
used as match or support funding. Congress recognized the need to provide 
landowners and state agencies the security of knowing that these funds will be 
available to support projects on an annual basis. Long term funding allows all the» 
parties involved to take their time and achieve the best possible outcomes. 
Now is the time to establish the Land for Maine's Future Trust Fund. According to 
survey of Maine voters TNC commissioned in January 2023 with FM3 Research 
(Democratic Polling Firm) and New Bridge Strategy (Republican Polling Firm), nearly7 
in 10 voters see "great need / some need" for additional funding to protect air, water, 
and land. The LMF program consistently enjoys broad public support and has been 
approved by Maine voters each of the six times it has been on the ballot. Aside from its 
popularity, this effort dovetails nicely with other legislative efforts before this 
committee. LD 1285, which this committee unanimously supported, would direct 
another $20M into LMF this year out of the cascade, effectively turning the 4-year, 
$40M appropriations made in 2021 to 6-years and $60M. And LD 1881, which was 
heard in this committee a few weeks ago, would allow the Maine DEP to direct 
mitigation funds related to renewable energy development and transmission lines into 
a fund like’L' MF.x 
The Nature Conservancy strongly supports the concept of a Land for Maine's Future 
Trust Fund and long—term funding for the Land for Maine's Future program. We urge 
this committee to pass LD 1969. Please do not hesitate to be in touch if our 
organization can provide additional information or su; port.
