 
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1969 ,  
An Act to Expand the Use of Funds to Support Land Conservation  
May  22, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry , I am Melanie Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine ( NRCM ). I appreciate the opportunity to testi fy in support o f LD 
1969 . 
 
The Land for Maine ’s Future (LMF) program is Maine’s most effective and popular land conservation 
program. Over the past three decades, the program has helped fund more than 300 projects and protect 
more than 600,000 acres spanning all 16 Maine counties. L MF supports conservation and recreation 
projects for activities ranging from biking to birding, fly casting to cross -country skiing, and 
snowmobiling to swimming. LMF  provides one of the few funding options available for land 
conservation  of working farmland, working forests , and working waterfronts , often in the form of 
conservation easements . LMF projects are diverse and benefit Maine  people, businesses, and 
communities, as well as visitors to our state. Maine voters  have consistently shown their strong support 
for land conse rvation at the ballot box, passing six ballot measures to fund LMF since 1987.  
 
In 2021, the Legislature passed a budget with  $40 million for the LMF program over four years. Those 
appropriations were badly needed and are already being spent on meaningful  projects , large and small,  
across the state.   
 
This bill would repla ce the existing LMF  fund with  a trust fund and transfer all funds over to the new 
account . While the LMF program would continue o perating the same as it has suc cessfully for de cades , 
putting funds in this acco unt has several advantages.   
 
First, deposits ma de into the trust fund would be prote cted and no longer run the risk of being 
redirected to other programs or uses  within State government. Second , interest generated on the 
account would be put towar d the program . Third, the trust fund would all ow other sources of funds to 
flow i nto the program, including from private sources, not just from the State.  
 
Under LD 1969 , existing LMF dollars  would c ontinue to be allotted  and dispersed based on language in 
the 2021 appropriations bill :  At least 5% will go to  water access , at least 10%  will go to  the Working 
Waterfront Access Protection Program , at least 10%  will go to  the Working Farmland Access Protection 
Program , and the remaining will go  to conservation and recreation projects .  
 
Because of the new trust f und structure, the bill would  create  two new subprogram s:  (1) the 
Conservation a nd R ecreat ion Fund , which essentially  already  exists and has funded working fore sts and 
many popular sites for h iking, biking, snowmobiling, cross-country  skiing, and other activities , and (2) 
the Conservation Land Management Fund, which is new and , once funds are deposited into it, would 
support  capital improvements  to enhance  public recreation opportunities and enhance  wildlife  habitat  
on any permanently conserved p roperty, no t necessarily a property that was acquired using LMF funds.  
 
Since the LMF program was launched more than 35 years ago, it has delivered significant value for 
Maine people, the environment, and our economy. This bill would restructure how funding for the 
program is managed, enhancing its ability to receive and util ize diverse funding sources, so  that it 
remains  successful well into the future.   
 
I respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1969 . Thank you for your time and 
consideration , and I would be glad to answer any questions you may have.  
