E " 
1W 
'3: 
’,:-;- _- 
_ , ;.;‘:'\; 
_. 
T61‘€S8. S. Pl€I‘C€- THE MAINE SENATE 6 Waitgg Landing Road 
Senator, District 25 131st Legislature Falmouth, ME 04105 
Testimony of Senator Teresa S. Pierce introducing 
LD 1969, An Act to Expand the Use of Funds to Support Land Conservation 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
May 22, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and esteemed Members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee, my name is Teresa Pierce, and I represent Senate District 25, 
encompassing F almouth, Cumberland, North Yarmouth, Yarmouth (majority), Gray, and Long 
Island. Today, I am pleased to introduce LD 1969, “An Act to Expand the Use of Funds to Support 
Land Conservation. ” 
Since 1987, Land for Maine’s Future (LMF) has conserved more than 600,000 acres across the state. 
This has included iconic outdoor recreational areas such as Mount Kineo, the Cutler Coast, and 
Tumbledown Mountain, as well as Working waterfronts, productive farmlands, and working 
forestlands. LMF has also played a pivotal role in supporting the acquisition of outdoors spaces and 
parklands in proximity to Maine’s largest population centers, including popular family-friendly 
destinations in my district like Blackstrap Hill, Knights Pond, and Libby Hill Forest. 
LD 1969 builds on LMF’s 36-year record of success by making targeted changes to strengthen the 
program for the long term. For example, the bill directs current and future funding into a newly 
created LMF Trust Fund that will maintain all LMF dollars separate and apart from other state 
monies. Among other beneﬁts, this change will keep all investment income in the new LMF Trust 
Fund, making it available to expand the reach of the program. 
The creation of the LMF Tmst Fund is also an initial step in a process to identify and secure future 
dedicated revenues. Traditionally supported through bond issues, the program was most recently 
funded through a direct appropriation of $40 million in 2021. In the future, the goal is to ﬁnd new 
sources of money, that reduce the need for future bonds or appropriations. For example, LD 1881,a 
bill in this committee, would allow Maine DEP to direct compensation dollars associated with solar, 
wind, and transmission projects into the LMF Trust Fund. Supporters of this bill will be exploring 
other similar opportunities in the months ahead. 
Lastly, LD 1969 adds a new component to the LMF program: the Conservation Land Management 
Fund. With this change, the Legislature will have the authority to invest future funds towards 
improving recreational infrastructure and wildlife habitat management on Maine’s existing 
conservation lands. As conserved acres in the state grow, it will become increasingly important that 
those entities managing our public places have the resources necessary to ensure maximum beneﬁt to 
Mainers enjoying these lands and the Wildlife inhabiting them. 
I urge this committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1969. I am happy to answer any questions to the 
best of my ability, although I am happy to defer to others that follow me for more detailed questions. 
Chair, Committee on Housizzg * Edzzeafiozz and Cuiiurai AﬂZ1z' rs Committee 
Ceil: (207) 415-8631 ’ * State House (207) 287-1515 * Fa.x'@_’207}287-1585 * To/1 Free 1-800423-6900 * TTY 711 
Teresa. Pierce@iegisiatz1re. mainegov * fegisiatwe.mainegov/lsenate
