T/5" 
APTA 
M a l n e. 
A Chapter of the American 
Physical Therapy Association 
Testimony in Support of LD 1498, An Act to Create an Advocacy and Complaint 
Process for Health Care Providers Within the Bureau of Insurance 
HCIFS Committee, April 24, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members ofthe HCiFS Committee: 
My name is Gwen Simons. I am the lobbyist for the Maine Chapter of the American Physical 
Therapy Association ("lVlEAPTA"). l am a physical therapist myself and a healthcare lawyer in 
Scarborough. The Maine APTA represents over 2500 physical therapists (PTs) and physical 
therapist assistants (PTAs) in Maine. 
The physical therapists urge you to vote ”Ought to Pass” on LD 1498, An Act to Create an 
Advocacy and Complaint Process for Health Care Providers Within the Bureau of Insurance. 
The Bureau of Insurance currently does not respond to provider complaints or concerns even 
when the provider is representing the interests of the patient. They perceive all provider 
complaints as being "contract issues" between the provider and the carrier even when the 
carrier's conduct is clearly in violation of l\/laine law. 
Patients rely on their health care providers to help them navigate claims payment and appeal 
issues with their health plans. When the Bureau refuses to respond to providers who are 
representing the interests of their patients, the patient can be left with no advocate and no 
recourse. 
ln addition, some Maine laws that are under the Bureaus’ jurisdiction to enforce are intended 
to protect providers. If the Bureau does not enforce these laws, the laws are useless. 
We support the concept of establishing a Health Care Provider Assistance Division within the 
Bureau and hope it will move the Bureau toward enforcing existing laws regardless of who the 
complainant is - especially when it is in the best interest of the consumer that Bureau exists to 
protect. 
Thank you for your consideration. I can be reached at gwen@simonsassociateslaw.com or 
207.883.7225 if there are any questions.
