northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1498 An Act to Create an Advocacy and Complaint Process for Health Care 
Providers Within the Bureau of Insurance 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry  and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in support of  this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with more than 10,000 employees statewide. 
 
This bill establishes the Health Care Provider Assistance Division within the  
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Bureau of Insurance for health 
care providers to work with the Bureau of Insurance to resolve complaints involving 
insurance carriers.  The bill also provides a system for health care providers to submit 
complaints about violations  of statutes or rules. We are in full support of this 
legislation.    
 
The Northern Light Health finance and contracting leaders work with carriers directly to 
resolve our complaints and concerns and generally we can resolve the concerns.  The 
challenge we have is the lack of structure to elevate a complaint that cannot be 
resolved.  This results in providers pursuing legislation to resolve carrier concerns that 
have statewide impact.   
 
We ask that you support this important legislation. 
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
