géliaigment on LD 1498 “An act to create an advocacy and complaint process for health care 
providers Within the bureau of insurance ” 
Hello my name is Marie A. Laverriere and I live in Scarborough, ME. 
To all the members of this joint legislative committee: 
I am a Maine licensed clinical social Worker and I have a private practice offering mental health 
support to clients in Maine. I deal with clients who have insurance from several companies. 
These insurance companies do business in Maine and so I t@ that there should be some 
accountability placed upon these insurance companies. 
As I already mentioned, I’m licensed in Maine as an LCSW and I have to abide by many rules to 
maintain my license therefore, insurance companies selling their products in Maine should also 
have oversight from the State of Maine. 
I’m not certain that you all know how someone like me gets to work with clients and bill their 
insurances. I’ll attempt to describe it in a nutshell. 
-I graduated with a masters in social Work 
-I had to pass a national license exam to get my ﬁrst license as a conditional clinical social 
worker and work at an agency for 2 years full time and receive weekly supervision from a.n 
LCSW. 
-After I ﬁnished Working 4,000 hours and had 100 hours of supervision I then had to take the 
second national license exam to get my LCSW. 
-I then could Work as an independent LCSW in private practice.
-Then I had to go through a credentialing process with each of the insurance companies thatI 
planned to accept and bill, for my services. The credentialing process is very complicated andI 
had to hire someone to do it for me. It’s costly and new insurance companies pop up every year 
—it’s totally out of control. 
It would be great if the State mandated insurance companies to accept a process Where one 
package of paperwork for the credentialing process would be used for all insurance companies. 
I also had to hire a biller because insurance companies are mostly difficult to work with when it 
comes to billing. 
A short While ago, I had trouble with getting paid from an insurance company. I had to wait to 
get paid for a client that I was seeing Weekly, for the entire year and when they paid me it was in 
increments. Their reasons for not paying me on time were not understandable and there Was 
nothing I could do to fx it. I was at their mercy. I had been Working with this client for a While 
and I could not stop seeing him —it would have devastated him. You have to remember that We 
Work With people that at times are emotionally vulnerable. Sometimes I believe that some 
insurance companies bank on that fact as they make it diﬁicult for practitioners to get paid. 
If I have to call an insurance company for a question such as when I get a new client and I need 
to know if they are truly insured, what their deductible and/or copay amounts are. Most of the 
time I have to Wait on a phone line for hours to get this info. I can’t spend that kind of time. It 
would be great if insurance companies had a contact person with a phone number to help us get
this info when needed. They will tell you that they have a website where we can ﬁnd this 
information but it’s not that easy. The site is not accurate. In fact it’s very confusing because 
there are so many different types of coverage with the same insurance name. 
In closing, I want to mention a nurse practitioner ’s recent experience with two insurance 
companies. When I mentioned to her that I Was coming to testify, she shared this experience 
with me, andl would not be surprised if she stops her practice because she is so ﬁustrated. She 
runs her own practice. She had two new patients come to her separately and they both have 
diabetes. They are both on Ozempic and have been for a while and she was told by the insurance 
companies (two separate ones) to renew their prescriptions she had to get prior authorization and 
prove that they had tried all other types of other medication for diabetes first and prove that they 
did not work. These two people had gone through this process with prior health care providers 
so this NP has to request their records and this take up to 9i) days to receive so in the meantime 
she cannot reﬁll their prescriptions. This is endangering peoples lives. This process I was told 
by this NP was just implemented lately. It seem that insurance companies are allowed to 
endanger people’s lives and it’s ok because they have no accountability to anyone! 
Please consider passing this Act so that the State of Maine can show that it really cares about its 
citizens getting the best care they can have and also supporting health care providers. There is 
always a lot of talk about needing more therapists well, this move is in the right direction of 
encouraging more people to enter the ﬁeld. 
Thank you,
Marie A. Laveniere LCSW 
95 East Grand Avenue 
Scarborough, ME 04074 
207-205-2521 
marieML333@gmai1.c0n1
