Integrated Energy Systems , PLLC  
Richard Grondin , PE 
301 Middle Road  
Falmouth, ME 04105 -1229  
207.781.4263  
rgrondin@iespllc.com   
 
March 1, 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
Cross Building Room 208  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 570  "Resolve, to Provide Information to Maine's School Administrators and Maine 
Communities About the Financial Advantages of Modern Wood Heating "  
Dear Committee Members : 
My name is Richard Grondin.  I am president of the mechanical engineering firm Integrated 
Energy Systems.  I have been designing heating and air conditioning systems for schools for 3 5 
years . These systems have included fossils fuels, air source heat pumps , air-to-water heat 
pumps, geothermal, solar, wood chips and wood pellets.  Over the years, I have performed life 
cycle costs for various types of systems and wood chips and wood pellets have been the most 
economical choice for many of the projects.   I have had great success with wood chip and pellet 
boiler systems for schools , housing and businesses  in Maine and Vermont and I am in favor of 
LD 570. Some of the woodchip and pellet boiler projects that I have worked on include the 
following:  
 Mount View School, Thorndike, ME  
 Energy North, Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, Canada  
 Groveton Housing, Groveton, NH  
Oxford County Courthouse, Oxford, ME  
SAD4 Elementary School, Guilford, ME  
SAD4 Secondary School, Guilford, ME  
Burke Town School, West Burke, VT  
Lake Region High School, Naples, ME  
Crescent Park Elementary School, Bethel, ME  
Newark Elementary School, Newark, VT  
Miller’s Run School, Sheffield, VT  
Lyndon Town School, Lyndon, VT (current project)  
Schools are typically one of the largest buildings in the community .  School b uilding 
improvements along with  heating fuel  selection can have a major impact on the environment  and 
the local budget.   This bill would be a great step forward in promoting renewable energy, reducing 
energy costs, improving the local economy, and reducing the carbon foot print.   Below are some 
facts of biomass boiler systems : 
• Biomass boilers are well suited to replace existing school boilers.  Other renewable 
energy systems require substantial mechanical system renovation or replacement.  
• Wood chip and pellet fuel prices are very stable.  
• Wood chips and pellets are produced locally, thereby providing local employment and 
keeping energy dollars close to home . 
• Biomass boiler efficiency is about the same or higher than existing oil boilers  and s lightly 
lower than condensing gas boilers.  
• Minor  additional  maintenance is required compared to fossil fuels, but the energy savings 
offset the additional cost.    Features such as self -cleaning firetubes and automated ash 
removal are highly recommended.  
• More than 30% of Vermont public school students at tend a wood heated school.  Vermont 
started heating schools with biomass boilers in 1986.  
• The wood chip and pellet systems can be a teaching opportunity for the students  and the 
community.  
Wood biomass may not be the best solution for every school, but a m ajority of the communities 
would benefit from wood biomass heating systems.  
I would be glad to provide additional information in regards to biomass boiler systems or 
integrating biomass systems into existing schools.  
Sincerely,  
 
Richard Grondin, PE , CEM, CBCP  

