  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
Neither for Nor Against LD 1771: “An Act Regarding Speedy Trials”   
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Wednesday , May 10 , 2023  
 
Senator Carney , Representati ve Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, I am writing o n behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 to raise 
issues for your consideration regarding LD 1771 , “An Act Regarding Speedy Trials.”  
 
Current case r esolutions timeframes in our criminal courts serve no one well, including crime 
victims. Many of the interests a defendant has in having a timely resolution of the  criminal charges  
against them overlap with the inte rests of the person they have harmed. Our network works with 
thousands of crime victims each year as the criminal cases against those who have harmed them 
drag on. These cases are delayed due to things like requests for continuances while defendants build  
their resume of rehabilitative actions, s cheduling conflicts of the parties involved, too many cases 
vying for court time (a problem which existed prior to 2020), and countless dispositional conferences 
as the state and defense attempt to reach a negotiate d resolution . For many victims, each cour t date 
brings them back to one of the most difficult and traumatic series of events, raises their hopes for 
resolution, and results in  frustration and confusion as to why the process is taking so long.  Prolonged 
judicial process is a burden for crime victi ms. It impacts their ability to have closure.  
 
From a practical perspective,  many of the victims we work with are actively in the process of 
moving, rebuilding their social supports, changing their contact informat ion, and attempting to 
recover and heal f rom the harm that was caused . Particularly where our district  attorneys ’ office s 
already struggle to support meaningful engagement of crime victims in the process, the longer the 
case takes to resolve, the more likely it is that the state no longer has acc urate contact information 
for the victim and/or that the victim no longer sees participating in th e process as worthwhile. Given 
all of the above, MCEDV supports the policy goal of this bill to ensure that criminal cases are actually 
resolved in a timely m anner.  
 
However, we ask you to reconsider the proposal that th e remedy for noncompliance with 
the speedy trial requirements outlined must always be dismissal with prejudice . Such a bright line, 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs  provided services to more than  12,000 victims of domestic 
abuse and violence  and their children  in Maine last year.  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
without any room for a court to balance the potential harms, will prejudice crime victims  due to no 
fault of their own , elim inating potential pathways to  enhancing their  safety  (which incarceration, 
rehabilitative programs  and/or a set period of community supervision can bring) as well as making it 
more challenging for them to recover any economic loss they may have suffered .  
 
We would also note for the Committee’s consideration that some states codify victim -
centered rights around ensuring a timely process , up to and including  giving victims the ability to 
object t o a delay and requiring a court to consider the victim’s objection . In some states the  rights  of 
victims to a speedy process  are even enshrined in the state’s constitution. There is also precedent in 
other state’s statutes for addressing the practical real ities of a speedier case resolution, such as 
giving the State a period of time after sentencing to investigate and present to the court the nature 
and amount of economic damages a crime victim has suffered as a result of the crime for purposes 
of a restitu tion order.  We raise these few examples to highl ight that, w hen criminal process is 
changed, all aspects of the practical consequences and possibilities for positive change  should be 
considered thoughtfully in order to achieve a proper balance of the inter ests and rights of all 
involved.  Though we support the goal of LD 1771, we would ask you to consider that t he proposal in 
front of you does not  yet accomplish a right  balance.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to raise these issues. MCEDV and our member pro grams are 
happy to serve as a resource to the Committee as this bill moves through the process.  
 
  
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coa lition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650-4356  
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
