 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1771 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1771, An Act Regarding Speedy Trials  
 
DA: May 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1771.    
 
 CLAC supports the policy of prompt adjudication of criminal charges , which benefit s both 
victims  and accused persons .   Speedy trial legislation reflects laudable goals, but the proposed bill 
sacrifices public safety , accountability , and justice for victims for unrealistic deadlines that do not 
take into account the resources ne cessary to process cases or the time needed to investigate  complex 
cases, litigate legal questions  presented by substantive motions , or accommodate  dispositional  and 
settlement conferences .    There appears to be no provision for delays  attributable to scheduling  
substantive motions, and there is no discretion afforde d to the court if the statutory time lim its are 
not met (“the court shall dismiss the case with pre judice ”).   
 
 CLAC does not have the information needed to address the cost  of resou rces or the logistics 
of implementing  this proposal.  However, we recognize that the January 1, 2024 effective date is 
unrealistic, given the current court backlog.   The proposal does not indicate whether currently 
pending cases would be subject to the deadlines, and whether they should be delayed f urther or 
given priority to allow new cases to be litigated wi thin the dea dlines.    We also note that at least the 
following personnel and facilit ies would require substantial additional resources:   defense counsel, 
defense investigators  and experts, prosecutors, law enforcement, judges, court marshals, court 
clerks, the Office of Chief Medical Examiner, State Forensic Services, the Health and 
Environmental Testing  Lab, and the State Crim e Lab .  Counties would need financial resources for 
witnes s fees  and support staff for District Attorneys ’ offices.     
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General .  Our current  members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practition er, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as li aison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
