  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd 
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau   
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523 -9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
May 8, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State Ho use Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1771 --  An Act Regarding Speedy  Trials   
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL supports  LD 1771.  
 
The time has come for Maine to finally have a speedy trial statute.  Our co urts are 
helplessly backlogged and without the ability to  force speedy tri als, there is no way  
through that backlog.  Defendants as it stands now have to wait months, if  not truly 
years, before t heir case s are finally set for an actual trial, and t his is n ot acceptable.   
 
This bill would first of all establish very short t ime limits for trials to be held for 
defendants in custody.  These defendants are those most in need of a  speedy trial 
because they are sitting in jail, potentially serving jail time for crimes for which they 
could be found not guilty.  Criminal de fense attorneys have seen it happen time and  
again where the ir clients have been sitting in jail waiting for their trial, only to be 
ultimately found not guilty and then immediately released, hav ing served many 
months and sometimes eve n years, for a tr ial where they were found not guilty .  This 
is profoundly unfair,  wrong, and this bill would be a start to remedying that situation.  
 
For defendants not in custody, there are also established time li mits, albeit somewhat 
longer, but which would force a tri al to take place sooner rather than later.  For a 
defendant charged with a felony crime, a trial must commence within 270 days from 
arraignment or first appearance , and for  a misdemeanor, a defendant ’s trial must take 
place within 60 days from arraignment or first appearance.  These are tight, solid 
timelines  and would ensure that a de fendant would not have hanging over their head 
for an excessive period of time the  prospect that they have a  criminal charge pending 
again st them.  
 
There are various exclusions for time periods , and these exclusions are appropriate .  A 
delay resulting f rom a continuance granted th at the defense requests is certainly a 
reasonable exclusion, as is a d elay resulting from an interlocutory appeal , transfer of 
the case to another county, and other miscellaneous  reasons.  Important ly, if the 
prosecution mo ves to dismiss the charg e and then just files the charge again at a later 
time, the refiling does not reset or e xtend the orig inal time . 
 
 
 
 
Finally , and most importantly, if the trial does n ot take pl ace within the time limit, the 
court must dismiss the case, wi th prejudice.  This important , critical remedy makes 
sure that this speedy trial statute  would actually have some teeth  and force a  trial to 
take place or for the re to be a dismissal.  Without this remedy, this bill would really 
have no effect, a nd MACD L strongly encourages  this Committee to under all 
circumstances retain this portion of the bill without modification  or adjustment.  
 
For those concerned about how this would press the court system, that is  not 
unreasonable.  The statute would not take effect until January 1, 2024, so  the Judicial 
Branch would have plenty of time to make the necessary changes within the Branch  
and the court dockets to accommodate this statute.   
 
This bill is an impor tant, if not critical, step in getting our courts back on track.  Even 
before the pandemic, there were unnecessary delays, and defen dants sat in jail or had 
significant charges  hanging over their head for an excessive period of time. The 
pandemi c only ma de everything worse, to the point that there are thousand s upon 
thousands of cases that have still not yet been resolved and are now many years old.  
Something has to change, and thi s bill would do it.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity  to address  this issue.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legislative Committee  
  
 
  
             
  
             
                          
                          
 

