1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Hearing Date: April 20, 2023, at 1:00 P.M. 
  
L.D. 1463 – “An Act Regarding Equines and the Raising and Keeping of Livestock 
in Certain Motor Vehicle and Tax Laws” 
 
 
 Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the 
Transportation Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate 
Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services.  I am providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither 
For Nor Against L.D. 1463, “An Act Regarding Equines and the Raising and 
Keeping of Livestock in Certain Motor Vehicle and Tax Laws.” 
My testimony today is limited to Section 2 of the bill, which would amend 
the sales tax exemption and refund provision for depreciable machinery and 
equipment used in commercial agricultural production.  The Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation has seen several bills in this and past legislative sessions 
proposing changes to this section of the sales tax law. 
 The Administration would like to note the following considerations with 
Section 2 of this proposal.  It would amend the exemption and refund provision for 
purchases of depreciable machinery and equipment used in “commercial 
agriculture production” (found in Title 36, section 2013) to include the “raising and 
keeping of livestock, including equines.”  However, Maine Revenue Services’ 
Rule 323 regarding “commercial agricultural production” already includes 
“equines” in the term “livestock” if they are kept or raised primarily to produce 
food or other animal products, or for breeding; the boarding, riding, racing, or 
2 
 training of horses is not an activity that constitutes commercial agricultural 
production.   
Certain products used in animal agricultural production are exempted from 
sales tax under Title 36, section 1760, subsection 7-C, including products used in 
the “raising and keeping of equines.”  For this exemption, the animal agricultural 
production does not need to be commercial.   
Maine’s retail sales tax, like other state sales taxes, is largely a tax on 
personal consumption.  Sales tax exemptions for personal items are considered tax 
expenditures and used to incentivize a desired activity or achieve another tax 
policy goal.  On the other hand, business inputs are largely exempt, so long as the 
final business product is taxable, ensuring that the tax is only applied once, at the 
point of consumption. 
It is not clear how this bill is intended to fit into this existing sales tax 
framework.  The Administration recommends against exempting purchases by 
noncommercial equine owners, as these would be purchases for personal 
consumption or hobby use.  However, if the bill’s purpose is to exempt products 
used to provide “commercial” equine services, the Administration suggests both 
creating a new separate exemption for those products and then subsequently taxing 
the consumption of commercial equine services.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  
