Maine Climate Action NOW! 
T0: Maine Legislature Committee on Labor and Housing 
From: Ania Wright, Maine Climate Action Now & Sierra Club Maine 
Date: May 9, 2023 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1818: An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Ojjfshore 
Wind Power Projects 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Honorable members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing, my name is Ania Wright. I am a resident of Portland and a member of the Board of 
Maine Climate Action Now (MCAN), a statewide coalition of grassroots organizations who 
support transformative action in response to the climate crisis. I an1 also a unionized staff 
member at Sierra Club Maine, which is a coalition member of MCAN. At MCAN, we hold 
social, racial, and economic justice as critical to the transition to zero carbon emissions by 2030 
and demand the equitable implementation of clean renewable energy, ecological land-use 
practices, and bold cornmunity-led action for a more resilient Maine. To that end, we urge you to 
support L.D. 1818. 
This bill is an important step towards a responsible offshore wind industry in Maine. Port 
infrastructure is needed to realize direct and near-term economic and enviromnental beneﬁts for 
the people of Maine. The bill develops the necessary infrastructure for the State to help meet its 
renewable energy and climate goals with offshore wind energy resources located in the Gulf of 
Maine, while doing it in a way that protects our environment and ensures equity in the hiring 
process. 
In terms of equity, L.D. 1818 will ensure we listen to, and protect, frontline communities such as 
our lobstering and commercial ﬁshing industry - but also those coastal communities that support 
these industries with related businesses. It will require developers to hire Maine residents (who 
would be trained via apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs), including members of 
low-income, rural, historically disenfranchised, and tribal communities, as well as workers 
directly impacted by the growth of offshore wind energy. These jobs will be high quality, 
family-sustaining union jobs that will also serve to grow our local state economy. 
L.D. 1818 will lower the impact on nearby communities by requiring operators of port facilities 
to pursue federal funding for zero-emission equipment to ensure clean air and quieter port 
operations. It will also encourage the infrastructure to support responsible development of 
offshore Wind energy resources in the Gulf of Maine to achieve greenhouse gas emissions 
reductions in the state, stabilize energy supply prices, reduce Maine’s reliance on fossil fuels, and 
realize ecological beneﬁts for the people of Maine. Finally, the bill directs all relevant state
agencies to pursue newly available federal funding to enhance climate resilience and biodiversity 
of any nearshore, intertidal or upland areas disturbed by port development. 
In order to ensure an offshore wind port in Maine encourages good jobs and protects our 
communities, we urge the committee to vote ‘ought to pass’ on L.D. 1818. Thank you for your 
time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Ania Wright 
Legislative & Political Specialist, Sierra Club Maine 
On Behalf of Maine Climate Action Now
