 
 
 
May 9th, 2023  
 
Senator  Michael Tipping, Senate Chair  
Representative  Amy Roeder, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee o n Labor and Housing  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC  testimony in opposition to L.D. 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore 
Wind Power Projects  
 
Senator  Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the committee on Labor and Housing:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce . The 
Chamber is the voice of Maine business, speaking for approximately 5,000 Maine businesses of all sizes 
throughout the State. The Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in o pposition to L.D. 
1818.  
 
Over the last year, the Chamber has been pleased to serve on Maine DOT’s Offshore Wind Ports Advisory 
Committee. The Chamber supports efforts to develop an offshore wind port in Maine, and furthermore, we 
support the goals of the state to advance policy conversations to develop offshore wind in Maine. We have an 
enormous opportunity to take advantage of an abundance of our natural resources and turn it into an economic 
engine in Maine by generating Maine made clean energy. Unfo rtunately, what is proposed in L.D. 1818 does 
not help advance the se goals.  
 
L.D. 1818  require s any offshore wind port leased or owned by the state to have  a project labor agreement to 
construct  the port  and for continued operation a peace agreement. Addit ionally, all other operations created to 
support those facilities must have a union agreement. We have significant concerns over this. Right now, we 
have Maine based open shop contractors who are engaged in offshore wind work across the entire country. If 
Maine is shifting to develop offshore wind, we believe it would be in the best interest of the state to make sure 
that work is going to Maine based companies and Maine based jobs. We have seen onshore wind developed in 
Maine, and we would like to note that  100% of onshore wind has been done by Maine based companies. We 
feel it would make sense that if we are shifting to offshore wind, those same companies who have proven they 
can do this work should continue to do so.  
 
 
 
 
 Furthermore, we have significant con cerns that creating a port that has these demands attached to it will drive 
up the price of these projects which will eventually be passed onto the ratepayers. The first offshore wind 
projects will likely be expensive given it will be a significant transit ion. While there are long term benefits from 
offshore wind, the cost in the short term for construction, building, transmission, grid updates, etc will  be high . 
We fear that if the costs associated with building these projects are too high, we will price o urselves out of the 
marketplace and miss out on the potential opportunities offshore wind creates. For  a regional perspective, 
Massachusetts is looking at about 7 cent a kilowatt -hour for their offshore wind projects. So, if we want to be 
competitive with the region, we need to be smart about how we are enacting offshore wind policy otherwise 
investors might look elsewhere, and we will miss out on significant economic development and job creation.  
 
For these reasons, we would strongly encourage the committ ee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 1818. 
Thank you for the chance to testify today, I am happy to answer any questions or bring back additional 
information for the work session.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
