Maine Conservation Voters 
Infarrn. Vote. Protect. 
Testimony of Maine Conseivation Voters 
Supporting LD 1818 
“An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Ojjfvhore Wind Power Projects ” 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
May 9, 2023 . 
Good aftemoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Beth Ahearn and I’m the Director of 
Government Affairs for Maine Conservation Voters. Maine Conservation is an 
organization dedicated to making Maine’s environment, democracy, and climate action 
political priorities. 
Maine must develop more renewable energy to meet our ambitious climate and clean 
energy goals, and offshore wind must be part of the solution. Maine’s climate action plan, 
“Maine Won’t Wait,” sets a goal of 100% clean energy by 2050. Governor Mills has 
recently vowed to achieve that goal by 2040. Maine Won’t Wait identiﬁes offshore wind 
as one of the ways to get there and the Offshore Wind Roadmap, authored by the 
Governor ’s Energy Office and released in February of this year, details how. Maine is 
also on target to reach the statutory goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 80% 
below 1990 levels by 2050. 
Much is at stake. We need offshore wind power, and we need offshore wind power that’s 
developed responsibly. That means we need to ensure that projects, including new port 
facilities, protect the environment, provide real beneﬁts to neighboring communities, and 
have critical labor standards that protect working Maine people and ensure that they are 
receiving a fair wage, good beneﬁts, and a seat at the table. 
If we act now, Maine can set high environmental, equity and labor standards for this 
emerging clean energy industry. Other statesare competing to develop offshore wind in 
the Gulf of Maine. The Gulf of Maine has some of the strongest, most consistent winds in 
the world. That makes it a good place for offshore wind. The Gulf of Maine is also home
to critical Maine ﬁshing industries, and it is our responsibility to ﬁnd a way that offshore 
wind and ﬁshing can successfully co-exist. Our climate future depends upon it. 
Climate change is impacting Maine; our winters are warmer, our summers are hotter and 
drier, and the Gulf of Maine is warming faster than 90% of the waters in the world. You 
may already have experienced ticks this spring- they no longer die off as they did when 
our winters were colder. Maine is more dependent upon oil for home heating than any 
state in the country and this ongoing dependence is driving up energy prices for families 
and businesses. 
Responsibly developed offshore wind will deliver clean energy, beneﬁt commmiities, and 
launch an innovative new industry. Ports are a critical component of offshore wind 
development. Please vote unanimously ‘Ought to Pass’ on LD 1818. Help Maine to speed 
up the transition to clean energy, reduce our dependence on fossil fuels, and createa 
sustainable new industry powered by Maine people.
