Date: April 25, 2023 - 
To: Labor & Housing Committee 
From: Cole Cochrane, Maine Youth Action ,
A 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities 
Relating to Offshore Wind Projects .
p 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the honorable members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee. My name is Cole Cochrane, I am a senior at Thornton Academy in Saco, and I am 
here on behalf of Maine Youth Action, a statewide youth advocacy group that represents 
hundreds of young Mainers across the state from varying backgrounds. Maine Youth Action is 
testifying in support of LD l8 1 8, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind 
Projects. . 
When Maine Youth Action does its outreach to young folks, whether they are in middle school, 
high school, or even college, we ask them some questions about what they consider to be 
relevant issues facing our state and our nation. These impassioned advocates predominantly 
identify the climate crisis as the main issue we need to address. As you all are probably aware of, 
the brunt of the climate crisis will be on my generation. This is something that weighs heavily on 
young Mainers regardless of background. We face major environmental degradation, a 
tumultuous economic outlook, and a signiﬁcantly reduced quality of life. This is typically what 
drives us to become involved in politics. However, when we do this outreach, another piece is 
always emphasized. My generation emphasizes that our response to the climate crisis needs to be 
responsible and just. A response that needs to acknowledge that the policy decisions relating to 
the climate crisis is not only about solving the issue at hand, but is about reforming our 
communities to be equitable and sustainable. This is why our organization strongly supports LD 
1 8 1 8. <‘l
The development of offshore wind in Maine is critical to reducing our greenhouse gas emissions 
and meeting our targets of 45% by 2030 and 80% by 2050. LD 1818 advances these goals by 
requiring offshore wind projects to submit a plan to DEP to ensure the use of zero emission port 
equipment and/or technology. The plan and the subsequent analysis means that the offshore wind 
projects can pursue federal funding for zero emission equipment. Offshore wind also has the 
potential to be a signiﬁcant part of the state’s energy sector, which will create thousands of jobs 
in its construction, operation and maintenance. As such, it is imperative that we have an 
equitable and sustainable approach to its development, which is what LD 1818 achieves. The bill 
provides a strong foundation for fair labor, such as the requirement of project labor agreements 
on any new infrastructure that supports offshore wind, as well as for offshore wind projects that 
lease existing port facilities, as outlined in section 2 and section 3 paragraph A, respectively. 
Overall, understand this: the policy decisions you make today determine the reality that my 
generation will have to deal with. Therefore, when we talked with young folks and they 
identiﬁed that they want to see a just and equitable response to the climate crisis, I encourage the 
members of this committee to shape our policy to reﬂect as such. LD 1818 is a piece of 
legislation that is precisely what my generation is looking for and therefore I encourp[age you all 
to vote “ought to pass.”‘
