 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Opposition  to LD 1818-An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind 
Power Projects  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
May 9, 2023 
 
Senator  Tipping , Representative  Roeder  and members of the Committee  on Labor and Housing , 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon , and I am the Director of Advocacy  of the Portland Regional Chamber of 
Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 Mainers. Today we submit 
this written testimony to express our organization's strong  opposition to LD 1818 .  
 
Both t he federal government and our own state Offshore Wind Roadmap agree  that the project labor agreement  
(PLA)  mandate for port facilities proposed in LD 1818 is not an appropriate tool for advancing our federal and 
state offshore wind goals. The Maine Offshore Wind Roadmap makes clear that:  
 
“Maine is a small business state, with  limited workers represented by unions —particularly in the 
construction field. Broad and open discussion among many parties on the best approaches to provide 
long-term opportunities for Maine workers across the board is needed, with essential consideration  of 
multiple mechanisms to develop and support talent in Maine. ” 
 
The roadmap recommends a suite of workforce development issues that should  work together,  including but 
not limited to  PLAs. Additionally, while the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management’s lease stipulations extol 
some of the benefits of PLAs, they explicit ly do not  mandate  them . I will outline how  PLAs will adversley  affect  
workers, our economy, and our state policy goals . The actions necessary to support our  climate cannot be 
achieved with increased costs, delays, and inequities resulting from such  a broad government mandate. The 
roadmap makes clear that realizing the benefits of offshore wind in Maine is an “all hands -on de ck effort” that 
will not be achieved if mandated policy prescriptions are not reflective of our broader state economy.  
 
LD 1818 is Detrimental  to Workers: I recently attended an all -day Business Network for Offshore Wind 
event at the International Marine Terminal in Portland , where I witnessed  the breadth of Maine companies that 
could potentially contribute to the offshore wind industry’s successful development of port facilities in Main e. 
Unfortunately, th e majority of them would be at a disadvantage  in participating in th e port development of this 
transformative industry if LD 1818 is enacted . With only 5% of Maine’s construction contractors unionized , 
much of our skilled  workforce will  be outcompeted by large  out-of-state corporations, negating  many of  our 
comparative workforce advantages as laid out in the roadmap.  
 
This has direct impacts on the wages  of Maine workers. A recent study found that when non -union contractors 
are mandated  to work under PLAs, workers at those firms experience a 20% reduction in take -home pay1. Wage 
reductions of this magnitude would undermine the hard-won efforts of many private and public sector leaders  
in recent years to raise wages in Maine through work force development, business attraction, and research and 
development .  
 
 
 
1 THE DISCRIMINATORY IMPACT OF UNION FRINGE BENEFIT REQUIREMENTS ON NONUNION WORKERS 
UNDER GOVERNMENT -MANDATED PR OJECT LABOR AGREEMENTS  
 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
LD 1818 Exacerbates the Workforce Shortage: Maine’s  10-year Economic Development aims to e xpand our 
workforce by 75,000 workers by 2030. Unfortunately, LD 1818 hinders these  efforts. By disadvantaging 95% 
of Maine contractors in the construction of offshore wind  port facilities , this PLA mandate is favoring  a 
minority group of businesses that do not  represent the employment setting of the majority of Maine workers. 
We need t he full support of our workforce to achieve such a revolutionary transition in our energy generation. 
We cannot afford to favor the few over advancing our economy and all exi sting Maine -based businesses.  
 
LD 1818 Harms State Climate Goals: The biggest challenges facing our transition from our current 
generation mix to one that support s Maine’s climate goals are time and money. State-level mandated PLAs for 
port facilities will drive up the costs and timelines necessary to achieve  the capacity  of offshore wind energy 
required  to achieve an 80% reduction in  emissions by 2050 as contemplated in the Maine Won’t Wait plan. 
Although research is limited  on the effects  of mandated PLAs on construction costs, the studies available  point 
to significant  cost implications related to  such agreements, including one study of affordable housing 
developments that saw cost increases of nearly 15% related to PLA stipulations2. Increased costs come at the 
expense of additional investment in clean energy infrastructure, delaying critical investments in our energy 
transition.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask that this committee vote Ought Not 
to Pass on  this harmful  legislation.  
  
 
2 The Effects of Project Labor Agreements on the Production of Affordable Housing  
