Testimony from Ellis Reuter, in Support of L.D. 1818, "An Act Regarding Port Facilities 
Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects" 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is Ellis Reuter. l am an electrical apprentice. I live in Pittsfield, 
and l'm here today to speak in favor of LD 1818. 
We already have passed legislation to approve the production of the 12 turbine 
demonstration Project under a project labor agreement; a great step towards decarbonizing our 
power generation. With that said, l want to see it all built with quality craftsmanship. I don't want 
this to turn into more junk that we are filling the ocean with. If we want quality work, we should 
do it union. We want it done right the first time. You've probably heard that union members get 
paid more, and so we’re more expensive. But union contractors win competitive bids everyday, 
and they can win those bids because of the quality and efficiency of the workforce. 
Recently on the solar project l was assigned to, l had to change the task l was doing due 
to weather complications for the day. l was assigned to work with a different journeyman with 
whom l'd be doing grounding and bonding, and the journeyman took me section by section to all 
the work that had been done thus far to show me how to do the work right the first time. He then 
allowed me to go off and do the task on my own in a different section of the field. After a decent 
portion of it was done, l retrieved him and had him look over my work. He informed me of some 
corrections that l needed to make in order to finish out the work properly. He also noticed a 
section that I was coming to that he had not encountered thus far. He and I workshopped 
together on what would be the correct solution and ensured that l would implement the correct 
solution so it would be done right the first time. 
It's that sort of comradery, cooperation and professionalism that comes froma 
brotherhood and sisterhood. To me, this is uniquely American: In a union, we start out as 
individuals. In our country, we started out as individual states. As we unify in a union, our voices 
become louder and our needs become met. As we unify as a country, our voices become louder 
and we can affect change upon the world. ln a real sense, the act of founding our country isa 
vote in favor of unionism. 
To conclude, to have these turbines be built with quality, that is a union trait. To be united 
together despite differences, that is an American trait. Thank you for your time and please vote 
ought to pass on LD 1818.
