Testimony in Support of L.D. 1818, "An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Ofﬁrhore 
Wind Power Projects ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing, and I’m here today to speak in favor of L.D. 1818. 
My name is Francis Eanes, and I’m the executive director of the Maine Labor Climate Council, a 
coalition of 20 unions and labor organizations here in Maine, representing thousand of working 
people across our state. Our coalition has come together to tackle the climate crisis at the pace 
and scale needed to preserve a livable planet, while pursuing a just transition that puts working 
people and communities ﬁrst. 
We are here today to talk about LD 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Oﬂfvhore 
Wind Power Projects, sponsored by Sen. Chip Curry of Waldo County. This bill sets out a vision 
for What a 21st-century clean energy port ought to look like, wherever it‘s located, so that We 
maximize the economic and environmental beneﬁts of offshore wind for Maine Workers and 
surrounding rural communities. 
But what this bill is really about is saying YES. Because we know that building big infrastructure 
projects today in America can be really difﬁcult for all sorts of reasons —- and an offshore wind 
port is certainly a big project. We also know that it’s easy to say “no” — not in my backyard. But 
if we are going to take the climate crisis seriously and transform our energy and infrastructure 
systems accordingly, we know we need to start saying yes. 
Today you’re going to hear from many speakers, representing a big and broad coalition, who in 
their own ways are saying yes to a responsibly built offshore wind port. Some of them.are.union 
members, some environmental activists, but they’re all saying yes. Some of them are" saying yes 
to creating thousands of good union jobs in manufacturing, construction, operation, maintenance, 
and maritime activities — and rebuilding the local economies of our coastal and inland 
communities" that have been hollowed out over the past four decades. 
Some of them are saying yes to brining people into these good jobs frompopulations and 
communities that have been overlooked or left behind, whether that’~sne~\v Mainers, people 
coming out of incarcerations, our tribal communities, or high school students»/in*'Searspo1t 
looking for an alternative to college.A 
Some of them are saying yes to building a port with state of the art zero-emission port 
technology, so that port workers and surrounding can breathe clean air. And all of us are saying 
yes to building oifshore wind in ways that protect and invest in the coastal communities and 
people who make their livelihoods on the water. 
We have a long ways to go to build the muscle of saying yes, but this bill, LD 1818, is a great 
way to start. I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1818. Thank you.
