gs 
4 $>>)‘! altd F$=Hé4I9 vi"/f (wvlw ﬁlin- 
Testimony of Glenn Adams 
in Opposition to LD 1818 
"An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects" 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Glenn Adams and I serve as the Business Development Director 
for Sargent Corporation located in Orono. We are a proud 100% employee-owned company. 
Sargent is also a member ofthe Associated Builders and Contractors of Maine. On behalf of our 
182 members who employ over 2,500 Mainers, we are testifying today in opposition to LD 
1818. 
As Maine continues to grapple with next generation energy production we have a lot of 
questions that need to be answered. Some environmental, some political, and even economic. 
However, there is one question that does not need to be answered, and that is the one of 
workforce. Maine's construction industry is ready and able to take on the challenge of offshore 
wind. Our organization is excited about the forward movement that Maine DOT has made in 
site planning for a potential offshore wind terminal designed specifically for these projects. This 
project will touch virtually every sector of the construction industry and send hundreds of 
millions of dollars into the economy. 
You can imagine our dismay when this bill came across our desk a few weeks ago. While we are 
at the precipice of launching a massive infrastructure project that could provide jobs for Maine 
companies and Maine people, we are facing the prospect of those very jobs being outsourced 
to out of state companies. LD 1818 has far-reaching implications. The bill impacts not only the 
potential offshore wind port facility but also any construction required to utilize it, including 
transportation infrastructure. 
By requiring project labor agreements for this project, or any other project for that matter, the 
law will be discriminating against the 90% of Maine workers who choose not to join a union. If 
in-state contractors decide not to bid on a job because of a mandated PLA the workforce fora 
project of this size will be limited. The only place to fill the gap would be out of state, leaving 
Maine workers out in the cold. 
PLA’s are wasteful in virtually every situation. They are documented to cause project costs to 
skyrocket anywhere from 12-20% when implemented. The goal of the offshore wind port 
facility is to facilitate clean, renewable, and reliable power to the grid. The cost of this facility 
will be carried at some point by the rate payers ultimately buying the energy. We should not be 
creating unnecessary hurdles that will increase project costs and contribute to even higher 
energy costs.
Project labor agreements also cause training opportunities to be lost. l\/laine's construction 
industry has made unprecedented investments into training our workforce through 
apprenticeships, on-the-job training, and various other workforce development programs. We 
are all stepping up to the plate in big ways to train our workers. If a large portion of Maine’s 
labor force is made ineligible for participation because of a mandated PLA, those opportunities 
for training are hindered and, in some cases, lost. 
This bill also includes the provision of a mandated labor peace agreement between an 
employer and any labor union attempting to organize at the site. This is an untenable position 
for any employer to be in and does nothing but create roadblocks to companies looking to work 
and invest through the port. 
ABC Maine finds this bill unnecessary and potentially damaging to the huge potential of Maine's 
offshore wind port facility and industry as a whole. We want all Maine workers to be eligible to 
build Maine's clean energy future. Should the Legislature pass this measure you will be sending 
a message that Maine's offshore industry is open, but only for a select few. 
On behalf of our membership, ABC Maine asks you to vote "ought not to pass" on LD 1818. 
Thank you and I'd be happy to answer any questions you may have.
