An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power 
Projects  
 
Good Afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteem 
members of the Labor and Housing Committee.  My name is Grant 
Provost, I am the Business Agent for Ironworkers Local 7 and a Maine 
State AFL-CIO Executive Board Member.  I come before you today in 
favor of LD 1818 An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore 
Wind Power Projects.   
       The importance of this piece of legislation cannot be understated 
today.  Maine has a revolutionary opportunity, an opportunity that 
won’t be feasible without a dedicated port.  An Offshore Wind Port 
focused on Floating Technology, the first in the Nation.  We have a 
chance to lead our great State into the next phase of humanity, where 
we leave the Industrial Revolution behind and move into the Electrical 
Revolution.   A port dedicated to Offshore Wind will spearhead a new 
industry Mainers can participate in for years to come.  It will provide 
anchor jobs in the Building and Construction Trades for decades and 
give not only our college grads a chance to stay local, but thousands of 
apprentices will be able to use this as a launching point to their careers.  
Our State’s Registered Apprenticeship Programs will be turning out 
thousands of apprentices into family sustaining union careers, 
reconstructing our energy infrastructure into one of the future.    
      This Bill can be an effective vehicle for what we can deliver to our 
local constituents, high quality union jobs.  Or continue to spin the 
perpetual wheel that has held so many back here in Maine.  Low pay 
and the lack of quality employment sends our neighbors, friends and 
family members out of State for work.  This is a major drain on talent, 
would be resources to local businesses, and coincidently is not driving 
the average age of Mainers lower.  I have over a decade spent working 
in States other than my own, it’s how I became a homeowner.   
     The simple facts are, to maximize the federal funding for port 
facilities States are using Project Labor Agreements and Labor Peace 
Agreements.  None of these are new ideas, PLA’s and LPA’s do not 
prevent contractors or developers from bidding, winning or working on 
a project.  These agreements do create a level playing field and 
maximize benefits for those who not only work on the port but will 
work in the port after construction.   
     Up and down the east coast Offshore Wind Projects are being 
permitted, are under construction and have been completed using 
Project Labor Agreements.  Developers not only understand PLA’s and 
LPA’s but prefer the security and guarantees they give them.   Now with 
the Inflation Reduction Act, developers enjoy the consistent and 
bountiful funding a Project Labor Agreement and a Labor Peace 
Agreement can provide.  The good news is anyone can enter into these 
agreements’ union or none, it is a business decision.   
     What this Bill will do is build a port of the future for the future.  
Capitalizing on existing federal dollars to stay consistent with what the 
existing market trend is while striving for a carbon free if not carbon 
neutral port.   A state-of-the-art facility for an emerging industry where, 
through our combined goals of achieving commerce that benefits local 
community members.  Maine creates an outstanding opportunity we 
can hang our hats on and hand off to the next generation with pride.  
For we were innovators who wouldn’t settle for anything other than 
the best for our natural resources, our environment, friends, neighbors, 
and families.  We fought like hell, and we got it done!!!  I urge the 
committee to vote ought to pass, making this endeavor a remarkable 
step in the journey to not only a carbon free Maine but a national 
example of how just transition can be done.  
 
Appreciate your time, 
Grant Provost 
207-314-3530 
gprovost@iwlocal7.org 
Grant Provost
Brunswick
LD 1818
An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects 
Good Afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteem members of the 
Labor and Housing Committee.  My name is Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent 
for Ironworkers Local 7 and a Maine State AFL-CIO Executive Board Member.  I 
come before you today in favor of LD 1818 An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating
to Offshore Wind Power Projects.  
       The importance of this piece of legislation cannot be understated today.  Maine 
has a revolutionary opportunity, an opportunity that won’t be feasible without a 
dedicated port.  An Offshore Wind Port focused on Floating Technology, the first in 
the Nation.  We have a chance to lead our great State into the next phase of humanity,
where we leave the Industrial Revolution behind and move into the Electrical 
Revolution.   A port dedicated to Offshore Wind will spearhead a new industry 
Mainers can participate in for years to come.  It will provide anchor jobs in the 
Building and Construction Trades for decades and give not only our college grads a 
chance to stay local, but thousands of apprentices will be able to use this as a 
launching point to their careers.  Our State’s Registered Apprenticeship Programs will
be turning out thousands of apprentices into family sustaining union careers, 
reconstructing our energy infrastructure into one of the future.   
      This Bill can be an effective vehicle for what we can deliver to our local 
constituents, high quality union jobs.  Or continue to spin the perpetual wheel that has
held so many back here in Maine.  Low pay and the lack of quality employment sends
our neighbors, friends and family members out of State for work.  This is a major 
drain on talent, would be resources to local businesses, and coincidently is not driving
the average age of Mainers lower.  I have over a decade spent working in States other 
than my own, it’s how I became a homeowner.  
     The simple facts are, to maximize the federal funding for port facilities States are 
using Project Labor Agreements and Labor Peace Agreements.  None of these are 
new ideas, PLA’s and LPA’s do not prevent contractors or developers from bidding, 
winning or working on a project.  These agreements do create a level playing field 
and maximize benefits for those who not only work on the port but will work in the 
port after construction.  
     Up and down the east coast Offshore Wind Projects are being permitted, are under 
construction and have been completed using Project Labor Agreements.  Developers 
not only understand PLA’s and LPA’s but prefer the security and guarantees they give
them.   Now with the Inflation Reduction Act, developers enjoy the consistent and 
bountiful funding a Project Labor Agreement and a Labor Peace Agreement can 
provide.  The good news is anyone can enter into these agreements’ union or none, it 
is a business decision.  
     What this Bill will do is build a port of the future for the future.  Capitalizing on 
existing federal dollars to stay consistent with what the existing market trend is while 
striving for a carbon free if not carbon neutral port.   A state-of-the-art facility for an 
emerging industry where, through our combined goals of achieving commerce that 
benefits local community members.  Maine creates an outstanding opportunity we can
hang our hats on and hand off to the next generation with pride.  For we were 
innovators who wouldn’t settle for anything other than the best for our natural 
resources, our environment, friends, neighbors, and families.  We fought like hell, and
we got it done!!!  I urge the committee to vote ought to pass, making this endeavor a 
remarkable step in the journey to not only a carbon free Maine but a national example
of how just transition can be done. 
Appreciate your time,
Grant Provost
207-314-3530
gprovost@iwlocal7.org

