May 10, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
RE: LD 1818 – An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Labor and Housing , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government Relations Director  for 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine . I appreciate this opportunity to submit written 
comments in support of LD 1818 – An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore 
Wind Po wer Projects . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create 
innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that nature  and 
people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages local communities, 
governments, the private sector, and other partners.   
 
TNC has been working  to conserve, protect, and restore coastal and marine habitats and 
species for over four decades.  Our work in the ocean has been focused on conserving habitats 
and marine species, improving and  sharing science that enables solution -oriented decision -
making, and mitigating climate impacts to  biodiversity in the marine environment. We are 
committed to using a science -based and pragmatic  approach to work collaboratively with 
offshore wind developers, federal and state agencies, and  natural resource users to find 
expedient solutions to climate change that are beneficial to people  and nature.  
 
We recognize that port development is key to advancing offshore wind in our state and 
region . LD 1818 sets comprehensive standards for the development of port facilities in our 
state, taking into consideration job quality, workforce development, environmen tal impacts, 
permitting, coastal conservation and climate resilience. Additionally, LD 1818 directs the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection to consult with the Departments of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, Marine Resources, Transportation and the Maine Port Authority to 
explore opportunities to seek federal funding to support this work. We know there is 
enormous opportunity to leverage federal dollars for critical Maine projects.  
 
TNC supports the deployment of well -sited offshore wind as part of a diverse portfolio of 
renewable energy resources. Our organization is focused on ensuring the offshore wind 
industry in Maine – and the required port development – considers potential impa cts and 
benefits to the people, communities, workers, and coastal and ocean habitats. We appreciate 
the approach in LD 1818 to explore and require clean port equipment and technology, which 
would ensure clean air and quieter port operations. We also strong ly support the efforts to 
pursue federal funding to support coastal conservation and climate resilience in relation to 
port development.  
 
TNC urges the committee to support LD 1818 . Thank you for the opportunity to comment and 
I am available to answer q uestions at any time.  
