Testimony from Kilton Webb, in Support of L.D. 1818, “An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating 
to Offshore Wind Power Projects" 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Kilton Webb and l’m here today to speak in favor of L.D. 1818. 
I am a member of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 567 and a resident 
of Auburn. 
I am just now finishing my union apprenticeship. The long road of gathering those 8000 work 
hours is not an easy or quick journey. Just under five years ago I got a call from my training 
director Al Sheppard informing me that he had my dispatch ready for my first job. The job was 
going to be a solar field down in Kennebunk. Sure that was a bit of a trip for me but I was ready 
and excited to get the chance to get out there and do some electrical work. lt’s incredible to me 
how fast time has ﬂown by. On that job nearly five years ago I was one of the youngest people 
on the job site at 23 years old. On the job site I'm working on now, a new solar ﬁeld in Woolwich 
l’m one of the older members. Solar has been a great thing for the State of Maine, but also the 
Mainers like myself who come together to build them. 
After seeing the staggering amount of work that has kept myself and many others like me busy 
and employed I am very excited at the prospect of Offshore Wind. Offshore Wind has the 
potential of providing untold amounts of jobs to Mainers like myself who are already in the field. 
But what truly excites me is the prospect of having jobs ready for all of today's current middle 
and high school students. The middle and high school students of when I first started my 
journey of becoming an electrician are those very same apprentices I work with and teach every 
day. 
In the field, we all know that the other trades are doing their best to feed their family and get by. 
What truly has me most excited about this bill is the fact that so many different groups of people 
had input into its formation. Together the lobstermen and fishermen joined us in the building 
trades to find a solution that will benefit all of us together. Today I am here to ask you, my 
Senators, and my Representatives, to join us in Support of LD 1818. Thank you for your time 
and I'm happy to try and answer any questions.
