District 129: Saco (part)  
  
 
Margaret O’Neil  
21 Sheila Circle  
Saco, ME 04072  
Phone: (207) 590 -1679  
Margaret.ONeil@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: Maine Relay 711  
 
 
May 9, 2023  
Testimony of Rep. Maggie O’Neil presenting  
LD 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore 
Wind Power Projects   
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee, I 
am Rep. Maggie O’Neil. I represent House District 129 in Saco. Thank you for the opportunity 
to share my support for LD 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore 
Wind Power Projects , which I am proud to cosponsor.  
 
As Maine transitions to an economy built on clean, renewable energy, we have an incredible 
opportunity to ensure that transition promotes a mor e equitable future, supports working people, 
and protects our environment. LD 1818 is a critical step toward ensuring Maine’s offshore wind 
industry is built in a way that creates high quality jobs and ensures a more sustainable future.  
 
With these goals i n mind, the bill proposes standards for creating the port facilities that are 
necessary for building offshore wind.  
 
First, it requires offshore wind developers using state port facilities to enter into Project Labor 
Agreements and Labor Peace Agreements.  As we mobilize to avert climate catastrophe through 
renewable energy, we are creating new jobs. LD 1818 ensures that new offshore wind jobs 
created will be well -paying, high quality jobs that support Maine families. This measure also 
puts our state in a p osition to maximize federal ports funding.  
 
Second, it requires developers to prioritize 1) the use of registered apprenticeship and pre -
apprenticeship programs and 2) hiring Maine residents, marginalized workers, and people 

District 129: Saco (part)  
 impacted by the growth of offshore wind in our state. These provisions will  contribute to a strong 
workforce and a just clean energy transition.  
 
Third, it directs both port facility operators and state agencies to pursue relevant federal funding 
to ensure projects that are climate friendly, protect biodiversity and ecosystems, a nd promote 
quality of life in the communities around port facilities.  
 
Finally, LD 1818 ensures a robust public process around these projects. Stakeholder input and 
transparency will be essential to making sure that offshore wind projects are a success, a nd this 
bill ensures that port facility location and other important decisions are made with extensive 
public involvement.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. Please feel welcome to contact me with any questions you 
may have for me.  
