Testimony from Mike McGuigan, in Support of L.D. 1818, "An Act Regarding Port Facilities 
Relating to Oﬂfvhore Wind Power Projects ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Cormnittee on Labor 
and Housing, my name is Mike McGuigan and I’m here today to speak in favor of L.D. 1818. 
I’m a Business Rep/Organizer with the Carpenters Union, I am a member of local 352, I represent 
Maine carpenters in locals 349 and 352 and I live in Windham. 
The ﬁrst thing I’d like to talk about is the fact that we are in a crisis that will make life very difﬁcult 
for our children and our ehildren ’s children. Global warming is happening and if we don’t start 
doing big things to change it then we have failed our future generations. This project is a huge step 
in the right direction to ensure we can have a future that looks bright, and We keep our fragile 
planet safe from global Warming. 
I have been working in Maine as an organizer in the Carpenter ’s Union for almost 12 years. During 
this time, I have done a lot of organizing around the underground economy in metal frame and 
drywall on big commercial projects. In the open shop there is no representation for workers, 
unfortunately people get taken advantage of. People are not trained properly so safety conditions 
are not good. They wind up living in terrible living conditions and are often mistreated, underpaid 
or not paid at all. In the open shop there is rampant misclassi ﬁcation of Workers on jobs including 
state certiﬁed jobs. Tax fraud is happening on just about every commercial open shop project in 
Maine.’ 
If We pass this bill, we can avoid all the issues with misclassi ﬁcation, all union contractors pay all 
their workers legally with a great beneﬁt package that includes health care and retirement. If we 
pass this bill, it ensures that these projects will be built with the utmost professionalism and safety 
because it will be done by legitimate union contractors. With that, I ask you to please support LD 
1818. Thank you!
