STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or TRANSPORTATION 
_, , 16 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0016 
Jane! T. Mills Bruce A. Van Note 
GOVERNQR COMMISSIONER $5’ 
.5 1%“? E: 
. 
G 57.,
‘ 
May 9, 2023 
Testimony of Nina Fisher 
Maine Department of Transportation‘ 
Before the 131“ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
In Opposition to LD 1818 
An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing, I am Nina Fisher, Deputy Commissioner at MaineDOT. MaineDOT is in 
opposition to LD 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power 
Projects. 
LD 1818 requires that any public port facility constructed to serve an offshore wind power 
project employ project labor agreements. It requires that any offshore wind power project that 
involves the lease of a port facility owned by the state use project labor agreements for all on-site 
construction of materials for the project and requires that “labor peace agreements ” be 
implemented for all full-time employees involved in the manufacturing, fabrication, operation 
and maintenance of the facility. The bill also requires a development plan that must ensure 
collaboration and recruitment within the state’s trade and labor unions. The plan must include 
details of how project contractors will use workers from the Maine Apprenticeship Program, how 
they will promote a diverse workforce, and a description of how costs of the wind project will be 
reduced using labor peace agreements. 
MaineDOT has several concerns with this proposed legislation. Currently MaineDOT does not 
require project labor agreements for highway, bridge, airport, rail, or marine port facilities. 
These projects are performed by qualiﬁed Maine companies. The success of these companies is 
dependent on the ability to bid and perform the type of work that MaineDOT advertises. The 
requirements set forth within LD 1818 would limit their ability to do so and limit the number of 
contractors able to bid any offshore wind power projects. This makes the environment for 
bidding on these projects less competitive and will likely be an upwards cost driver for 
constructing offshore wind port facilities. V 
THE MAINE DEPARTMENT OF 'I‘RANSPOR'lA'I'l()N IS AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION - EQUAL OPl’OR'l‘UNI'l‘Y EMPLOYER 
PHONE: (207) 624-3000 T'I‘\ UQERS CALL MAINE RELAY 7ll FAX: (207) 624-3001
The development plan that is required under section one, part four of this bill, discusses the use 
of zero-emission port equipment and technology. We assume this language to include cranes, 
delivery vessels, tugs, barges, etc. While a worthy goal, zero-emission port equipment isa 
relatively new concept making this requirement unrealistic and extremely costly. Requiring 
costly and potentially underperforming port equipment will be an upwards cost driver that will 
make a Maine based offshore wind port facility less competitive. 
In an effort to entice more contractors to bid our work, MaineDOT has made signiﬁcant efforts 
over the past few years to make contracting more streamlined. Competition results in lower 
construction costs and a better value for the Maine taxpayer. Passage of this bill would 
negatively impact this effort. The end result will be that the State of Maine will either lose out 
on opportunities to develop a windport and the economic beneﬁts it would create and/or pay 
more for offshore wind port development projects. 
It is for these reasons that we urge the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 1818. Thank 
you. 
THE MAINE DEPARTMENT Ol TRANSPORTATION is AN AFFIRM/\'I'lVE ACTION - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLO\ER 
P QNE1(Z°7)<iZ4-W00 'I‘T\ ussns CALL MAINE RELAY 711 FAX: (207) 0241
