Testimony from Richard Maysonet Rivera, in Support of L.D. 1818, "An Act 
Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing, my name is Richard Maysonet Rivera and l’m here today to 
speak in favor of L.D. 1818. I am an electrical Apprentice from Fain‘ield representing 
IBEW 1253. 
I have worked on many solar farms in Maine and one of my favorite aspects of working 
on them is that I know that the work that I do is helping to solve a global issue that can 
impact me and my family in the near future. Also I love the fact that the fields which we 
put these farms on can be restored or used as farm land. 
I have been in the union for 3 years now and It has been the best decision of my life. 
Working with my fellow brothers and sisters and seeing the knowledge and care that 
they put into their work is amazing. You can truly tell that they love what they do and are 
gifted at it. I have worked with non union in the past and from my experience it creates 
an atmosphere of uncertainty. Many of the workers that non union companies bring to 
these big work sites are usually temps who don't share the same care to safety or 
quality compared to union workers that I have had the privilege to work next to. I have 
never feared for my life or wellbeing working on a union worksite but i have compared to 
working with non union counterparts. Another point is that many of the temps that are 
brought in will leave as soon as these projects are done. Most union members are local 
mainers who will use the pay to take care of their families and reinvest the money they 
earn back into the local economy 
LD 1818 Not only supports the state's goal to reduce our carbon footprint but also aids 
in ensuring the work that will be done will be done mostly by locals who care about their 
work and safety. I Remember when janet mills came to farmingdale and spoke to us 
about starting a apprentice week to help support the growth of apprenticeships in maine 
Lets honor her promise to do so by supporting LD1818 which ensures that any 
company that does this work must use a registered apprenticeship so we can grow the 
future of maine together. 
I urge all of you to support LD1818. Let us show that not only can we build something 
as big as this project but we can also do it the right way.
