LD 1818, An Act Regarding Port Facilities Related to Offshore Wind Power Projects 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roder and the esteemed members of the committee on Labor 
and Housing,  
 
The burning of fossil fuels to produce electricity is a significant driver of the global climate 
emergency. A rapid transition to renewable energy is imperative if we are to avoid the 
catastrophic effects of runaway climate change, effects which will devastate Maine’s economy, 
and our unique ecology. Offshore wind is one of our greatest opportunities to protect Maine’s 
prosperity. 
 
My name is Scott Vlaun. I am the executive director of the Center for an Ecology-Based 
Economy (CEBE) in Norway, Maine. I’m writing today in support of LD1818. CEBE has been hard 
at work for the last ten years to raise awareness of the climate crisis and help our rural area 
adapt to the accelerating effects of climate change, impacts which are already adversely 
affecting our environment and placing an increasing burden on our municipalities and local 
economy. In a region so dependent on tourism associated with our once pristine lakes and 
forests, as well as a reliable winter snowpack and ice on our lakes, the collapse of once reliable 
weather patterns poses great risk. We are in a global climate emergency, yes, but it is a local 
emergency as well. 
 
We are fortunate to live in Maine where our forward-thinking government has developed a 
robust climate action plan and has begun to provide assistance to rural municipalities like those 
that my organization works with as a Service Provider for Maine’s Community Resilience 
Partnership. While a step in the right direction, this funding is but a drop in the bucket in the 
face of the adaptation measures that will be required to adapt to accelerating climate change, 
and also do our part to help mitigate the crisis.  
 
To that end, our area has seen an explosion in the development of solar power, which my 
organization embraces, but we are also seeing a lot of blowback on this as commercial solar 
developers have run roughshod, often siting installations without community input and careful 
consideration of important ecological factors. Terrestrial wind deployment here is also 
controversial as it often involves building roads into pristine areas and has minimal community 
support. The fact is that rural western Maine, while doing its part, cannot become a sacrifice 
zone in Maine’s transition to renewable energy, especially considering that much of Maine’s 
electrical consumption is in our cities and more affluent coastal areas.  
 
The time for rapid deployment of offshore wind is now. This source of clean, renewable and 
reliable energy dwarfs any other resource we have available, and will put Maine on the road to 
energy independence. LD 1818 moves us dramatically in the right direction, building on the 
work of broad coalitions across fisheries, labor, renewable energy advocates and climate 
activists. This important bill is a giant step for Maine’s future energy security in the waning days 
of the fossil fuel era, and will represent a significant contribution to the fight against global 
climate change. Please vote ought to pass on LD1818. 
 
 
