
Steve Miller
Islesboro Islands Trust
LD 1818
May 20, 2023
Committee On Labor and Housing
RE: LD1818 – An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power 
Projects
Co-Chairs Senator Tipping and Representative Roeder, and members of the 
Committee on Labor and Housing, Islesboro Islands Trust (IIT) appreciates this 
opportunity to submit written comments regarding LD1818 – An Act Regarding Port 
Facilities Relating to Offshore Wind Power Projects. I apologize for not submitting 
comments during the May 9 hearing on this bill. As you all know, several bills 
speaking to offshore wind are before this Legislature resulting in some uncertainty on 
our part as to when to bring our concerns forward. I testified before the Committee on
Energy, Utilities and Technology last Thursday at which time it was suggested that 
we bring those concerns to this Committee.
IIT advances land conservation, ecosystem education and environmental advocacy in 
the Penobscot Watershed. For nearly 40 years, IIT’s conservation, education, 
advocacy, and research demonstrate a commitment to protect the quality and integrity 
of the watershed, including a commitment to sweeping response to climate change. I 
am IIT’s Executive Director, a life-long Mainer and graduate of the University of 
Maine. I also serve on Maine’s Offshore Wind Port Advisory Group.
IIT applauds our State Government’s vigorous response to climate change and 
offshore wind research. While LD1818 requires important worker protects that we 
support, unless explicitly captured by an amendment to LD1818, the bill as presented 
does not address the crucial importance of applying strong, proven environmental 
standards and existing state policies to siting and construction of manufacturing, 
assembling and launching facilities, called "port facilities relating to offshore wind 
power projects” here. 
(1)The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2022 report makes the case that
conservation of fully functioning ecosystems offers a highly effective climate change 
response. For example, in this scientifically validated report we find the following:
a."Conservation, improved management, and restoration of forests and other 
ecosystems offer the largest share of economic mitigation potential...;"
b."Some options, such as conservation of high-carbon ecosystems (e.g., peatlands, 
wetlands, rangelands, mangroves and forests), deliver immediate benefits...;" and
c."Conservation, protection and restoration of terrestrial, freshwater, coastal and 
ocean ecosystems, together with targeted management to adapt to unavoidable 
impacts of climate change reduces the vulnerability of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services to climate change (high confidence), reduces coastal erosion and flooding 
(high confidence), and could increase carbon uptake and storage if global warming is 
limited (medium confidence)."
(2)Maine’s Offshore Wind Roadmap includes the following at Objective E:
a."Maine is committed to protecting and preserving the Gulf’s marine species, 
habitats, and wildlife, and to pursuing responsible development of offshore wind 
technology that advances renewable energy with as few adverse impacts as possible."
(3)The Maine Climate Council’s “Plan for Climate Action, Maine Won’t Wait,” 
says in part:
“Climate change and development are harming Maine’s natural and working lands 
and  waters, which are key to the state achieving its carbon neutrality commitment by 
2045. Protecting natural and working lands from development maintains their 
potential to draw back carbon from the atmosphere, as well as provide important 
co-benefits. Maine’s coastal and marine areas also store carbon, while supporting our 
fishing, aquaculture, and tourism industries.”
(4)A United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) program called 
RE-Power (see https://www.epa.gov/re-powering) urges repurposing out-dated or 
unused carbon-based energy facilities for renewable energy use. Mack Point (see 
attached map illustration) has been identified by EPA as a suitable site for this 
re-powering/renewable energy development program. 
(5)The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) identify the 
Penobscot River and Bay as a nationally important habitat focus area. One objective 
of this Penobscot Watershed habitat focus cited by NOAA would, “Promote habitat 
restoration that results in benefits to water quality, watershed based recreation, and 
resilient coastal communities.” 
Therefore, we strongly urge amending “An Act Regarding Port Facilities Relating to 
Offshore Wind Power Projects” to include the following: 
Developers of any offshore wind manufacturing, assembling, and/or launching 
facility, including any project by the State of Maine, shall: (1) ensure that the least 
environmentally damaging plan is pursued, (2) favor repurposing outdated industrial 
and/or energy sites for the proposed facility, (3) avoid damaging undeveloped and 
ecologically significant locations, and (4) consider impacts on wildlife and fisheries.
Thank you.
