Testimony of Tyler Matz in Support 0l' L.D. 18 l 8, "An Act Regarzling Port Facilities 
Relating to ()_[}‘5‘h0re Wind Power Projects ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Tyler Matz, I live in District 2, in the beautiful town of Portland and l am here today 
to speak in favor of L.D. 1818. 
I am a union electrical worker, a proud member of the IBEW, and a union delegate to the Southern 
Maine Labor Council. 
The Maine Offshore Wind project we are undertaking in the next few years is groundbreaking. i am told 
that one of its size has not been done before in the U.S. and as our global emissions footprint brings us 
further and further away from being able to reach our goals of a sustainable world for our future 
generations, it is important that new projects like these are done right so that we can set a standard for 
those that follow. In Maine's last push for green energy during the solar boom, we saw far too many 
contracts go to non-union contractors that relied on under experienced and underpaid labor, and what 
resulted was dozens of poorly built ﬁelds that were a far cry from the example we need to set for 
Maine's new ﬂagship ﬂeet of offshore wind turbines. 
lt is for this reason in particular that L.D. 1818 is necessary. It addresses the problem of contractors using 
cheap and untrained labor by requiring that developers prioritize the use of registered apprenticeship 
and pre-apprenticeship programs. However, this bill is not just addressing the quality and sustainability 
of wind energy initiatives in Maine, but also supports working class people like myself and many of my 
brothers and sisters in here with me today. This bill aims to ensure that my fellow tradespeople are 
compensated fairly for our labor, by requiring developers using state port facilities to enter into Project 
Labor Agreements and Labor Peace Agreements. This means that those working on this project are 
compensated with a livable wage and beneﬁts which becomes increasingly important as working class 
people are priced out of more and more areas. l love Maine, l plan to stay in Maine, I'm sure everyone in 
here with me today feels the same. But to live here and support a family, we don'tjust need work, we 
need work that pays for housing, food, and healthcare. 
It is with this in mind that I ask you all to support this bill. Allowing organized and fairly compensated 
labor to be a part of a project this important means that it will be done right, the ﬁrst time, by Mainers. 
Thank you for your work, and please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1818.
