ff; STATE OF MAlNE 
DEPARTMENT or LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Jane, T‘ Ming Lainzi A. Foitmzm 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Dillon Murray, 
Legislative Liaison, Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1935, An Act to Promote Workforce Development by Establishing a 
Workforce Development Program Thursday, May 18, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I am Dillon Murray, Legislative Liaison for the Maine 
Department of Labor (Department). I am here today to speak on behalf of the Department 
neither for nor against LD 1935, "An Act to Promote Workforce Development by Establishing a 
Workforce Development Program." 
The proposed legislation would require the Department to develop and implement a workforce 
development program with the purpose of providing services for individuals including language 
acquisition, housing services,job training and education, transportation, health care and case 
management. The Department would coordinate with other state agencies to develop and 
implement an intake system, including an application and system for case management. The bill 
gives rulemaking authority to the department to implement the requirements of the legislation, 
and Sec. 2 of the bill contains an annual appropriation of $10,000,000 per year. 
The Department greatly appreciates the intent of this bill, which is to support New Mainer 
populations currently in need of the services required in the legislation. We recognize the 
importance of this issue, and the need of coordination in delivering the necessary services to 
support the transition into available good paying jobs with opportunities for advancement as 
quickly as possible. 
The Mills Administration, through the Governor's Office of Policy, lnnovation and the Future, has 
been working closely with the necessary State agencies and stakeholders — such as DHHS to 
deliver rapid response services, Catholic Charities and MaineHousing to deliver housing and 
shelter needs, DOE to bolster investments in language acquisition programs, and DOL to 
connect individuals tojobs and workforce training opportunities 
We saw this bill, for the first time, a few days ago. While we support the overall goal of the bill, 
we need additional time to analyze the implications for undertaking this new program. The 
Department does want to express that this responsibility is outside our normal workforce 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 TTY use-rs‘ call Maire Relay 711 FAX: [207] 287-S292 
l‘he Maine Department of Iaboi piovides Eqtlil opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and §€!‘\/lC€S are '1‘»dIl<lbl €tlpOi1ié.qULS €lOl|lLllVlLl\ldlS with disabiiiiies
development expertise. We would need to explore expanding our service delivery model to 
ensure the array of comprehensive services envisioned in the bill could be provided. 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration. The Department looks forward to 
working with the Committee and the sponsor and other state agencies in the coming days. I am 
happy to try to address any questions you may have. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth.
