i Department of the Secretary of State 
we-3.’ -1 F’
J I, :2- ~,' ~ . . . . 
Bureau of Corporatmns, Electlons and Commlsszons 
iv/\\_3| 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of State Julie L. Flynn 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Sherma Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 2], 2023 
Testifying in favor 
L.D. 1604 “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Extend the 
Time That a Signature on a Petition for a Direct Initiative of Legislation Is Valid” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
ofﬁcer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 1604. 
This was not at the department ’s request, but we thank the sponsor for putting forth this commonsense 
adjustment to our petition process. 
This committee has heard multiple times about the intense pressure the elections division ~ and indeed 
our entire Department — was under last fall certifying two petitions with a combined total of more than 
159,000 signatures in 30 calendar days while simultaneously conducting the 2022 general election. 
This bill would eliminate the necessity of a petitioner submitting signatures earlier than the 
Constitutional deadline, in order to avoid losing signatures that were made more than a year from the 
submission date, which is a major reason that two initiatives were submitted a week before the 
November 2022 election. L.D. 1604 changes the validity of signatures on petitions from 12 months to 
18 months, which would align with the lifespan of petitions — also 18 months. 
We do not foresee this constitutional amendment to have an undue burden on our elections division nor 
a ﬁscal impact. To refresh the committee ’s memory, we have included again an overview of the entire 
petitions process. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions that the 
committee may have. 
I01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www. Maine. gov/sos/cec; rel. 207-624-7736 Deputy Secretary of State
Overview of the petition process 
Some may ask why the petition certiﬁcation process generates such an extraordinary level of effort 
including overtime hours when conﬁned to the 30-day calendar timeline from submission. It is 
important to understand that the current process for determining the validity of a petition is a multi- 
step, manual process. First, once a campaign delivers their boxes of petitions, elections staff remove 
every petition from the box and begin ensuring they are arranged alphabetically by town. As each 
petition is removed from the original box, election staff check that each signature page has the 
corresponding legislation stapled to it (if it is a multi-page petition) and must take note if is not. Next, 
the petitions are hand counted twice into batches of 50 and placed in labeled manila folders and new 
boxes. Then, a numeric sticker is placed on every single petition page. Once every petition is 
numbered, the following information from the petition is manually entered into a database: name of the 
signer, the town where the person signing is registered, and the petition number and line number where 
the signature appears. For one of the petitions that was submitted before Election Day in 2022, that 
meant over 74,000 signatures. 
Once all the information from the petitions is entered into a database, staff then need to conduct checks 
for duplicate signatures. In order to do this, the information entered is generated into a report that is 
then reviewed by staff for potential duplicate signer names. Upon the identiﬁcation of a potential 
duplicate signature, a team of two staff pull each petition where a potential duplicate name appears and 
examine the signature and handwriting to determine whether the signature was made by the same 
person on each petition. For each duplicate, staff notates on each petition which was the original 
signature, which was the duplicate, and on which petition and line to ﬁnd the corresponding signature. 
When all potential duplicate signatures have been reviewed, every petition undergoes a certiﬁcation 
process where several elements must be met including proper dates, review of circulator afﬁdavits, and 
proper notarization of the petition, to name a few. Again, this step is all done manually. VVhat required 
elements are or are not present determines the validity of the signatures on the petition. For example, if 
a signature was dated more than one year before submission to the Secretary of State or a petition was 
not properly notarized, those would be grounds to invalidate a signature or multiple signatures. Once 
that is completed, the number of valid signatures, and the number and reason for any invalid signatures 
are entered into the database, along with the names of the circulators and the notaries and the date of 
the notarization. 
The ﬁnal step involves prooﬁng every petition and the corresponding data entry to ensure the number 
of valid and invalid signatures determined during the certiﬁcation step have been correctly recorded. 
To reiterate, this is done manually. 
We are currently working on updating our central voter registration (CVR) system, Phase I of which 
we will implement later this year. We look forward to this updated system for many reasons— 
including the petitions module the new CVR will contain (included in Phase II for completion in 
2024.) This module will allow us to automate some of the manual procedures we do when processing 
petitions. However, this alone is not a solution to the current problem because it still will not prevent a 
situation where multiple petitions are brought to the elections staff at once for processing during the 
peak season of election administration. 
I 01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www. Maine. gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
