 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
Neither For Nor Against  
 
LD 1569 , An Act to Exempt Certain Disabled Veterans from Property Taxes in Accordance with 
Their Disability Ratings  
LD 1595, An Act to Exempt the Estates of Veterans Who Were Disabled in the Line of Duty from 
Property Taxes  
LD 1717, An Act to Provide a Property Tax Exemption for All Veterans over 62 Years of Age  
& 
LD 1737, An Act to Provide up to $5,000 in Property Tax Relief to Veterans  
 
May 1 7, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony neither for nor against LD 1569, LD 1595, LD 
1717, and LD 1737  on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by thei r peers to 
serve on the Association’s Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s 
position on bills of municipal interest.   
The bills before the Committee seek , in a variety of ways, to amend the statutes 
extending a property tax exemptio n to members of the U.S. Armed Services . These bills are 
presented annually , and generally address the elements of the law that dictate  who is eligible for 
the exempt ion and the value  of the benefit provided.   
In one way or another these bills seek to am end existing law (Title 36 , §653, sub -§ C) 
that provides a $6,000 exemption to a veteran who is either: (1) at least 62 years of age and 
served in the U.S. Armed Services during a federally recognized; or (2) receiving any form of a 
pension or compensation fr om the U.S. government  for a total service -connected disability 
incurred or aggravated during active military service and in the line of duty.     
Of the four proposals for consideration , all are  both similar , yet unique , as each seeks to 
increase the property tax assistance provide d to veteran s, while  offering different levels of 
benefit  to different categor ies of veteran homeowners .  
For example, LD 1569 extends an exemption ranging from $3,000 to $10,000  based on a 
service -connected rated disability and provided to all disa bled veterans, regardless of age o r 
whether enlisted  during a wartime period . The bill further requires the state to reimburse 
municipalities for 100% of the lost property tax revenues.   
LD 1595, on the other hand, extends the $6,000 exemption to all veterans who are at least 
62 years of age  and provides a full exemption from property  taxes to veterans who are  receiving 

any form of a pension or compensation from the U.S. government for  a total service -connected 
disability incurred or aggravated during active military service and in the line of duty.   
In the same vein, LD 1717 se eks to extend the $6,000 exemption to all veterans who are 
at least 62 years of age.  
Finally, LD 1737 extends a full exemption, cap ped at a value of $5,000 in taxes, to all 
veterans who are at least 62 years of age and provides a full exemption from property taxes to 
veterans of any age who are  receiving any form of a pension or compensation from the U.S. 
government for a total service -connected disability incurred or aggravated during active military 
service and in the line of duty.   
All similar, yet different.   
Except for  LD 1569, which keeps municipalities whole, depending on the value of the 
exemption and the number of veterans who  would be eligible, the proposal s will have varying 
impacts on the remaining property owners left to fund the unreimbursed portion of the lost tax 
revenues .     
While it is entirely up to the Legislature to determine the value of the benefit and who is 
eligible t o receive the benefit, municipal officials ask that you keep two factors in mind.  
 First, the administrative complexities; that is, will the changes advanced increase the 
administrative  burdens placed on the assessors who will have to implement the new exemption.  
Second, the impacts on the property taxpayers, including the beneficiaries, who are left to 
fund the unreimbursed portion of the provided exemption.  
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 1-800-452-8786.   
