1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 5/17/23 
  
LD 1569 – An Act to Exempt Certain Disabled Veterans from Property Taxes in 
Accordance with Their Disability Ratings 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1569 – An Act to Exempt 
Certain Disabled Veterans from Property Taxes in Accordance with Their 
Disability Ratings. 
This bill provides a property tax exemption for the estates of certain veterans 
for property tax years beginning on or after April 1, 2024, who do not qualify for 
the current exemptions because of age or service requirements.  Like current 
exemptions for the estates of veterans, the exemption is also made available to an 
eligible survivor, who may be a widow or widower, a minor child or a parent of an 
eligible disabled veteran, following the death of the eligible disabled veteran.  
Unlike the current exemptions, the new exemption would provide a flat exemption 
amount that increases from $3,000 to $10,000 based on the percentage of the 
veteran's service-connected disability. The bill also requires state reimbursement to 
municipalities and the Unorganized Territory Education and Services Fund for 
100% of the property tax revenue lost as a result of the exemptions. 
While the bill seeks to recognize the important service and sacrifice of 
veterans, the Department respectfully notes that this specific proposal is 
2 
 complicated and is not well coordinated with existing property tax exemptions for 
veterans.  Instead, we encourage proposals like LD 1569 to be part of a broader 
discussion of property tax relief and possible alternatives to the property tax 
stabilization program. 
The bill as written would provide a greater benefit to many veterans who do 
not currently qualify for a veteran exemption than veterans who do qualify for the 
current exemption.  This disparity would result in an exemption of up to $9,000 for 
newly covered veterans who are less than 100% disabled, but an exemption of only 
$6,000 for certain veterans who are 100% disabled and covered by the current 
exemptions. 
Similarly, veterans who are 100% disabled due to service-connected injury 
and did not serve during a recognized war period would receive an exemption of 
$10,000, but veterans who are 100% disabled due to service-connected injury and 
who served during a recognized war period would only receive an exemption of 
$6,000. 
Additionally, section 653(1)(D-4)(4) needs clarification; the language states 
that an individual may elect to receive an exemption under another paragraph in 
lieu of the new exemption, but the language of the new exemption limits eligibility 
to veterans who do not qualify under the other paragraphs. 
Enactment of this proposal will trigger the 50% State reimbursement 
requirement required by the Maine Constitution, Article IV, Section 23 and may 
also trigger the 90% State reimbursement under Article IX, Section 21 for costs to 
the municipalities to administer the new exemption. 
Furthermore, enacting a separate set of exemptions for veterans who do not 
currently qualify for a veteran exemption with different qualification tests for 
3 
 service period, age, and level of disability increases complexity for taxpayers, 
municipalities, and for MRS.  A simpler approach could be to expand the 
eligibility or value of the existing exemption.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
