 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Comm unity Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 961 
 
AN ACT REGARDING THE RIGHT TO REQUEST FLEXIBLE  
WORKING ARRANGEMENTS FOR EMPLOYEES  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing  Committee.  I am Steven 
Bailey , executive directo r of Maine School Management A ssociation, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association , in 
opposition to  L.D. 961. 
 
School Boards and superintendents are opposed to t his legislation because o ur first obligation is to make sure 
we have teachers and other personnel in school where  and when  they are needed to provide education for our 
students  during the school year . 
 
We are aware that our staff members will need time off  in the regular school yea r and during certain days 
during the year. When and how that occurs  should remain a district -level decision  and as agreed to within the 
collective bargaining agreement . Schools have  set schedules for students and staff and policie s on leaves -of-
absenc e. Those leaves are often addressed in contracts. If there is no language in contracts, a leave would need  
to be requested and considered individually . A longer -term leave request often needs school board 
consideration for approval.  
 
Someti mes there are job-sharing arrangements in districts, which offer  staff more flexibility within schedules. 
In addition, there is Family Medical Leave and Earned Paid Leave  along with the summer break.  
 
Individual situations require circumstances to be r eview ed as needed. We know of many instances already 
where accommodations have been made to allow for circumstances where flexibility would assist with a 
schedule of an employee. With bus runs, set arrival times and departure times for students, and the va st 
majority of all students and staff needing to be on site at the same time, providing the option for school staff 
to request flexible working arrangements would be seen as a nightmare within a daily and weekly schedule for 
schools.  
 
We value our staff  and kno w they unders tood the schedule they signed up for when taking on the all -
important job of teaching our children . If this bill moves forward, we would like assurances in the language 
that it does not apply to school staff.  
