 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Opposition to 
 
LD 1239, An Act to Make  General  Election  Day a State  Holiday  and to Allow  Certain   
Employees  an Opportunity  to Vote  
 
 
April 21, 2023 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government: 
 
My name is Alison Sucy and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for the 
Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association (MTA) is the state’s largest tourism 
organization with 1500 members in every type of tourism business such as lodging, restaurants, 
campgrounds, retail, guides, outdoor recreation, amusements, and historical and cultural attractions. 
We’ve been promoting Maine and our members for over 100 years. I present this testimony in opposition 
to LD 1239. 
 
MTA has several concerns about this bill. First, mandating that employers must provide three hours of 
paid leave for employees to vote will be expensive and difficult to fairly administer. The bill language 
states “If the employee's working hours do not allow the employee 3 consecutive hours in which to vote 
in accordance with this section, the employer shall provide the employee paid time off sufficient to allow 
the employee 3 consecutive hours in which to vote...” Who determines if the “working hours do not 
allow” the three hours to vote? The employee or the employer? A shift schedule that states 3-9 PM would 
be clear but what about non-shift or salaried workers? What if an employer is fine with a salaried 
employee leaving to vote but the employee feels like they have too much work to do that day? Is that 
employee then entitled to three hours of paid leave? This language might pit workers against each other as 
one may claim their working hours don’t allow the time off while another in a similar position believes 
they have sufficient time to vote. 
 
Second, there is ample opportunity for workers to vote without an election day holiday. Absentee ballots 
are easily obtained through a simple phone call or online request beginning at least 30 days before the 
election. If workers have concerns about possibly not being able to get to the polls in person on election 
day, the absentee ballot process is a simple and well-publicized as an option. Also, all polling places are 
open until 8 PM and many open early (6 or 7 AM), providing plenty of hours throughout the day and 
evening to vote in person. Tourism is known for its flexible scheduling and most of its jobs do not have 
traditional 8-5 work days. However, if workers have concerns that a normal schedule or break is 
insufficient to vote, they can make a schedule change that allows the time needed.   

 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
Third, if state and local government offices and schools are shut down for the holiday, patronage of 
tourism businesses—restaurants, retail, attractions—will increase at a time when tourism employers will 
be required to provide workers three hours of paid leave. That means they will have to pay one employee 
to go vote and simultaneously pay another employee to work at that same time. 
 
Finally, we believe that if Election Day becomes a holiday it will be confusing employers, workers and, in 
particular, visitors who won’t be accustomed to a state election day holiday occurring only in even-
numbered years. 
 
Tourism was one of the hardest hit industries during the pandemic. Maine’s tourism businesses are 
starting the slow process of recovery. Predictions are that it will be at least 2024 before the industry 
returns to pre-pandemic levels, according to the U.S. Travel Association. Maine’s economy is dependent 
on a successful tourism industry. According to the Maine Office of Tourism, 2022 numbers show that: 
 
•   Direct tourism expenditures totaled $8.6 billion 
•   Without tourism, Maine households would have had to pay an additional $2,172 in state and local taxes 
•   Tourism supported 151,000 Maine jobs 
 
Maine needs tourism to be successful, not just for the 151,000 people in its jobs and the direct economic 
impact but also for the indirect impact. Tourism businesses utilize contractors, landscapers, plumbers, and 
electricians; and they buy from our farms, fisheries, wineries, and breweries. If tourism businesses can’t 
succeed, these other businesses suffer as well. We want the tourism industry to continue to recover and 
grow and provide tens of thousands of jobs and billions of dollars to the Maine economy.  
 
Mandating an additional requirement for paid time off when many of our businesses are operating on very 
thin margins is a true hardship; particularly when this paid time off is unnecessary to achieve the goals of 
this proposal—increased voter turnout. Therefore, I respectfully request that you oppose LD 1239. Thank 
you for your consideration. 
