,2 11 
2; 2%” 
L LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS‘ 
TO: The Honorable Tim Nangler 
The Honorable Holly Stover, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
DATE: April 21, 2023 
RE: LD 1239 - An Act to Make General Election Day a State Holiday and to Allow Certain 
Employees an Opportunity to Vote 
Good morning Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Government. . 
My name is Allyson Gardner. l'm a resident of Fryeburg. l am here today as the Director of Maine 
Students Vote on behalf of the League of Women Voters of Maine. 
The League of Women Voters has been working for more than 100 years to strengthen voter turnout and 
remove barriers to voting for all citizens. The League testiﬁes in support of LD 1239. 
First, l'd like to clarify that we are in support of the "Election Day opportunity to vote" section of this bill. 
We are neither For Nor Against the ﬁrst section of LD 1239, which would make the general Election Daya 
state holiday, because the League does not have a policy position on that issue. While it-is a worthy idea 
in principle, we have some reservations. For example, closing down state ofﬁces and services on Election 
Day might actually make it harder for some citizens to vote.A
. 
Enacting a time-off —to-vote law is a better way to support voters in the workforce. Maine is a leader in 
voter turnout and in protecting voter rights, but this is one area where we lag behind. Thirty states plus 
the district of Columbia have laws requiring employers to provide time off to vote. Of those 30 states, 24 
require that the leave be paid.‘ LD 1239 would add Maine to ranks of states that provide this small but 
important beneﬁt to working citizens. 
When put into practice, this law would mean that employees could arrange to come to work a little late 
or leave a little early in order to vote in a general election. While the bill speciﬁes that employees may 
take up to three hours of paid leave to vote, in most cases a full three hours of leave would not be 
allowed. For example, an employee scheduled to work from 9 to 5 would have three hours after work to 
vote before the polls close at 8 and would not be entitled to the beneﬁt. An employee scheduled to work 
1 
Guerln, Lisa. "Taking time off to vote . NOLO, 
https://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/taking-time-off-voting-jury-29708.html 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.org
LWVME to SLG 2 
LD 1239 April 21, 2023 
from 8—6, however, could report to work at 10 -- assuming that the polls open at 7 in the empl0yee ‘s 
town -- or leave work at 5, at the discretion of the employer. The bill does not require employees to give 
notice of their intent to take advantage of this beneﬁt. The committee may want to consider adding that 
amendment. 
Passing LD 1239 would remove a barrier to voting for hourly wage workers who do not have the 
ﬂexibility to come and go from their workplace during working hours. Many of our community college 
students and high school seniors are hourly wage workers and would beneﬁt from this change. From 
students to individuals who work multi-jobs, this bill provides the opportunity to increase access to 
voting to a signiﬁcant part of the populations with the lowest voter turnout. 
Employees with long commutes would also beneﬁt. ln the best-case scenario, voting can take just a few 
minutes -- if you're already registered, if lines are short, if the polling place is easy to ﬁnd. But we know 
from our own observations that it can take hours to vote when lines are long. While it could be argued 
that absentee voting is an option for those who have to work on Election Day, some voters simply do not 
want to vote absentee. We should do everything we can to support voters who are motivated to cast 
their ballots on Election Day. 
This bill asks something of employers, but it is a reasonable ask. ln most cases, the amount of leave time 
would be only an hour or two. The employer decides when to schedule the time off. ln return, employers 
can take satisfaction in knowing that they are helping their employees to participate in the democratic 
process. In fact, many large corporations advertise and promote their support for employees ‘ rights to 
vote on Election Day. 
Maine should join thirty other states in requiring time off to vote for working citizens. We ask that you 
vote Ought to Pass on LD 1239. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Totitland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.o1'g
