Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
Testimony 
                                    In Support of  
LD 1239 An Act to Make General Election Day a State Holiday and to Allow 
Certain Employees an Opportunity to Vote  
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  
State and Local Government 
April 21, 2023 
  
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Committee on State and Local 
Government,  
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certified teacher.  The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired 
educators. 
 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 1239 An Act to Make General Election Day a 
State Holiday and to Allow Certain Employees an Opportunity to Vote. 
 
When a similar proposal came before the legislature in 2019, MEA supported it for two reasons. The 
first was that helping to ensure that all eligible voters have access to voting on Election Day is both in 
line with one of MEA’s core values, that of Democracy, and is also in line with one of the Guiding 
Principles for our students in Maine’s Learning Results1, that “each Maine student must leave school as 
…A responsible and involved citizen…” . Ensuring that all have access to voting is clearly part of being 
a responsible and involved citizen and is absolutely essential to a strong democracy. 
 
The second reason we supported this idea before was that having a state holiday on Election Day would 
help to keep our students safe. In many of our towns and cities the only places that are suitable as polling 
places are our school buildings. On Election Day, members of the public are entering the school building 
throughout the day during school hours and activities after school. Having our students in school on a 
day when voters are coming into the building to vote, sometimes many at a time, creates a potentially 
unsafe situation for not only our students, but also for school staff. In 2019, this was already a serious 
concern. Now in 2023 with what we have seen happening across our country, with increasing numbers 
of threats to schools as well as actual incidents of violence, and even as recently as the gun violence we 
have seen this past week in a community in Maine, the level of concern for safety in our schools is even 
higher than before. 
 
A 2018 poll conducted by Pew Research Center showed that two-thirds of respondents favored Election 
Day becoming a federal holiday2. There have been calls by many since then to do just that.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Let’s provide access for all to vote, provide role models for our students, and let’s keep our students safe 
on this very important day for our state and our democracy. 
 
We urge your support of LD 1239. 
 
 
1https://www.maine.gov/doe/learning/diplomas/MaineLearningResults 
 
 
 
2https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2018/10/29/views-of-election-policy-proposals/ 
