  
 
Date: April 18, 2023 
 
To: Senator Tim Nangle, Senate Chair 
 Representative Holly Stover, House Chair 
 And members of the State and Local Government Committee 
 
From: Karly Perry, Legislative Policy Committee  
 Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
 
Re: LD 1239 – An Act to Make General Election Day a State Holiday and to Allow 
Certain Employees an Opportunity to Vote 
 
Position: Neither For Nor Against 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is neither for nor against LD 1239, and we 
thank you for the    opportunity to outline our points for your committee. 
 
It is our understanding that the intention of this bill is to encourage better voter participation 
by allowing voters time off from work to be able to vote. Our research indicates that 19 states 
currently have some form of holiday on Election Day, but that comparisons of those states to 
others that do not have Election Day holidays appear to indicate there to be no relationship 
between Election Day holidays and higher voter turnout. 
 
Points to consider in support of Election Day as a State Holiday: 
 
● Could allow for more availability of citizens to work at the polls if their place of 
employment is closed for the day. 
● Many school gymnasiums serve as polling places, so additional parking would be 
available if the students and teachers are not present. 
● Open doors and increased public foot traffic present much less of a security risk if 
children and teachers are not present during polling hours. 
● Potential availability of town office staff from other departments to work at the polls 
because their offices will be closed. 
 
Points to consider in opposition of Election Day as a State Holiday: 
 
● Having the holiday on even-numbered years will mean the holiday will only be 
recognized every two years which will be confusing for everyone; consistency is 
paramount. 
● Increased costs for polling place set up and clean up - Public Works crews will need to 
be paid at the holiday rate of pay which can be time and a half or double time pay. 
● Increased costs for the municipal clerk employees and other municipal office 
employees who work at the polls - will need to be paid holiday rate 
 

● Increased costs for the Secretary of State Office employees who will need to work on 
Election Day and may need to be paid holiday rate. 
● Increased cost for overtime for building staff to open buildings used for polling places, 
if now closed due to holiday (schools, libraries, town offices). 
● Some schools that are polling places might be opposed to it - they already lose several 
educational instruction days during November - Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving break. 
To be closed yet another day might be difficult on students and teachers. For many 
low-income students, they rely on the schools to provide their breakfast and lunch 
meals each day. Being closed could create a hardship for these students. 
● Many businesses may choose not to honor the holiday due to the cost of payroll 
expenses and may not be closed for the day; it will not be financially advantageous 
for businesses to pay employees for an eight hour holiday in place of work; businesses 
may not want to lose a day of productivity and work. 
● Schools will be closed on Election Day and this could create a hardship and additional 
day care expense for parents who will still need to work during the day. Parents who 
need to send children to daycare for the day may pay $50 - $75, per child       ,  for this 
one day. 
● By state law, all polling places are open until 8pm and if employees work a typical 9am 
to 5pm job, they can vote after work. Many polling places open early such as 6am or 
7am and employees can vote before work. 
● Absentee ballots are always available at least 30 days before Election Day, so if 
someone has to work the entire time polls are open, they can obtain an absentee ballot 
in advance of Election Day and be able to vote. Obtaining an absentee ballot is as easy 
as making a two-minute phone call or going online for two minutes to place an order. 
The ballots are sent directly to the voter’s home and are voted at the convenience of 
the voter anytime during those 30 days.   
Thank you for allowing us to outline our thoughts and opinions regarding the logistical 
applications of this bill. 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its testimony 
with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact me by email at 
townclerk@westbathmaine.gov  or by phone at (207) 443-4342.  
