 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PETER GORE 
SENIOR GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS CONSULTANT 
pgore@mainestreetsolutions.com   45 MEMORIAL CIRCLE, SUITE 202 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04332-5307 
                                                                        207-622-7432  FAX 207-622-3117 
 
 
 
Hon. Tim Nangle 
Senate Chair 
Hon. Holly Stover 
House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Room 214, Cross State Office Building 
Augusta, ME 04330 
 
Friday, April 21, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government: 
 
My name is Peter Gore, and I am a Government Affairs Consultant with the firm of Maine Street 
Solutions.  I am contacting you on behalf of my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, and its statewide 
business members, and I write to express respectfully opposition to a portion of L.D. 1239, An Act to Make General 
Election Day a State Holiday and to Allow Certain Employees an Opportunity to Vote. 
 I apologize for not being present to deliver my testimony in person, however I have an unavoidable 
conflict this morning that prevents me being in your committee.  That said, the Chamber wishes to be on record in 
opposition to the portion of LD 1239 that would require all Maine employers to provide up to 3 hours of paid time 
off on Election Day in order for workers to vote.  We view this particular provision as both unnecessary, and costly, 
and believe there is already sufficient opportunity provided by municipalities, the state, and businesses for 
workers to meet their civic duty without foisting the monetary responsibility onto the business community and 
their wallets. 
 The Chamber takes no position on whether Election Day should be declared a statewide holiday.  We do 
take exception to Section 5, item 2 in the bill, which would require employers of all sizes to permit paid time off in 
the amount of 3 hours for employees to vote, should they already not allow their employees that same amount of 
time for the same purpose.  To begin with, it is my experience that many employers encourage their workers 
participation in the public process, and thus allow some level of flexibility on Election Day for voting without being 
mandated to do so.  That said, it is also incumbent on all of us to make time in our day to cast our ballots.  That 
may mean going to vote as the polls open early in the morning, or after work once the workday is through.  Both 
are viable choices. 
 Our state, like many others, has made significant strides in making it easier for people to vote at time 
other than Election Day.  Maine allows individuals to request absentee ballots that can be filled out well ahead of 
Election Day, referred to as 30 day, “No excuses” absentee voting.  These ballots can be put into the mail, 
deposited in absentee ballot collection boxes, or dropped at your local town hall.  In addition, many municipalities 
adjust their hours prior to Election Day, enabling early voting for those that cannot make it to the polls.  Any of 
these are viable options for citizens who cannot get away from work on Election Day, yet still want to exercise their 
Constitutional rights. 

2 
 
  Lastly, if none of these options work, every worker in a workplace of more than 10 employees is entitled 
to up to 40 hours a year in Earned Paid Leave (EPL) to use in whatever manner they chose.  There are actually few 
restrictions when it comes to notice and ability to invoke their rights to use the leave, and certainly time off during 
the workday to vote would qualify as sufficient cause and notice to use EPL.   
 Maine’s electoral participation consistently ranks in the top of our nation.  Clearly people in this state 
have the desire and ability to participate in our public process already.  We believe there are already in place 
sufficient opportunities for our citizens to go to the polls and/or cast their ballots, without having to mandate 
additional leave time and costs onto all Maine businesses.  As I indicated earlier, this was in part the whole point of 
enacting Maine’s EPL law - to give workers, with some limitations, unrestricted access to leave time to use as they 
wish.  It is for these reasons we believe Section 5 of LD 1239 is unnecessary, burdensome, and beyond the 
responsibility of Maine businesses.  We would ask, if you plan to move ahead with the passage of LD 1239, the 
committee strike this language from the bill. 
 Again, I apologize for not being present to deliver this testimony in person.  I will do my best to be present 
during the work session.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our comments and concerns. 
 
 
    Peter M. Gore 
   
 
 
    Senior Government Affairs Consultant 
    Maine Street Solutions 
 
 
 
 
